You can often do simple things yourself to ease an itchy bottom (anus). Get medical help if the itching does not stop.

How to ease an itchy bottom yourself
Do
gently wash and dry your anus after pooing and before bed
wash with water only, or use unscented soap when washing
wear loose-fitting cotton underwear
keep cool – avoid clothing and bedding that makes you overheat
eat plenty of fibre
– such as fruit and vegetables, wholegrain bread, pasta and cereal to avoid
constipation
Don’t
do not dry your bottom after washing by wiping or rubbing it, instead pat it dry using a towel or cotton wool
avoid wiping or rubbing your bottom too much with wet wipes
do not scratch, but if you cannot stop, keep your fingernails short and wear cotton gloves at night
do not strain when you go to the toilet
do not use scented soaps, bubble bath or bath oil
do not use perfumes or powders near your anus
do not eat food or drink that makes your itching worse, for example caffeine, alcohol, citrus fruit or spicy foods
A pharmacist can help with an itchy bottom
You can ask the pharmacist if they have a private area where you can speak.
They can suggest:
creams and ointments you can buy to help ease itching, such as steroid creams
medicine and things you should do at home if it's caused by threadworms – children under 2 and pregnant or breastfeeding women need to see a GP, midwife or health visitor instead
Find a pharmacy
Important
Using steroid creams and ointments for an itchy bottom
Do not use steroid creams or ointments for longer than 1 week because they can irritate your skin and make things worse.
Get medical advice if the itching is not going away after using a steroid cream or ointment for 1 week.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have an itchy bottom that is not going away
the itch keeps coming back
you have pain in your bottom
you have blood in your poo, which might be dark red or black
you're bleeding or leaking liquid from your bottom
you've noticed a change in your bowel habits
you have an itchy bottom and feel itchy on other parts of your body
you notice a change around your anus that is not usual for you

Treatment from a GP
A GP will try to work out the cause of your itching. They may need to check your bottom (
rectal examination
).
Depending on the cause, the GP might:
suggest trying things to ease it yourself
prescribe medicine, such as stronger steroid creams, or ointments
Important
Tell the GP immediately if a cream, ointment or other medicine makes the itching worse.

Sexual health clinics can help with an itchy bottom
You can also go to a sexual health clinic if you think your itchy bottom might be caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI) – for example, if you've had unprotected sex. They can provide the same treatments you would get from a GP.
Many sexual health clinics offer a walk-in service, where you do not need an appointment.
Find a sexual health clinic

Causes of an itchy bottom
There's not always a clear cause of an itchy bottom. If it gets better quickly, it might have been caused by something that does not need treatment, like sweating a lot in hot weather.
If it lasts longer, you might be able to get an idea of the cause from any other symptoms you have. See a GP if you're worried or if your symptoms keep coming back.
Itchy bottom and possible causes
Other symptoms with itchy bottom
Possible causes
Other symptoms with itchy bottom
Gets worse at night, worms in poo (they look like small pieces of thread)
Possible causes
Threadworms
, especially in children
Other symptoms with itchy bottom
Bright red blood when pooing
Possible causes
Piles (haemorrhoids)
Other symptoms with itchy bottom
Poo leaking or pooing you cannot control
Possible causes
Diarrhoea or bowel incontinence
Other symptoms with itchy bottom
Sores, swelling or irritation
Possible causes
Fungal infection or a
sexually transmitted infection (STI)
Other symptoms with itchy bottom
Itching elsewhere on the body
Possible causes
Skin condition such as
eczema
or
psoriasis
Other symptoms with itchy bottom
While using long-term medicine
Possible causes
Side effects of steroid creams, antibiotics, some gels and ointments for haemorrhoids or anal fissures, and peppermint oil
Important
It's unusual for an itchy bottom to be caused by something serious. But rarely, it may be a sign of conditions like diabetes or anal cancer, so it's important to get it checked by a GP.

