Blood in urine (pee) is not usually caused by anything serious, but you must get it checked out by a GP.

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
You have blood in your pee, even if:
you do not have any other symptoms
it's the first time it's happened
there's only a small amount of blood
you're not sure it's blood
Blood in your pee may be bright pink, red or dark brown.
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.
Important:
Cancer risk
Blood in pee must be checked out because it can be a sign of cancer. This is easier to treat if it's found early.

What happens at your appointment
If you have blood in your pee, a GP will ask about your symptoms and may need to check inside your bottom (
rectal examination
), and your vagina if you're a woman.
They might also:
ask for a pee sample or arrange a blood test
prescribe antibiotics if they think you have an infection
refer you to a specialist for tests

Causes of blood in urine
Blood in your pee could come from anywhere in the urinary tract – the bladder, kidneys or urethra (the tube that carries pee out of the body).
If you have other symptoms, this might give you an idea of the cause. But do not self-diagnose. See a GP if you think it's blood in your pee.
Possible causes of blood in urine
Other symptoms
Possible cause
Burning pain when peeing, need to pee often, smelly or cloudy pee, high temperature, pain in sides or lower back
Urinary tract infection (UTI)
Bad pain in sides, lower back or groin that comes and goes, unable to lie still, feeling sick
Kidney stones
Older men (common in over-50s) finding it difficult to pee, needing to pee suddenly and often, waking up to pee in middle of the night
Enlarged prostate
When it might be something else
It may not be blood in your pee if:
you've recently eaten beetroot – this can turn your pee pink
you're taking a new medicine – some medicines can turn pee red or brown
you're
bleeding from your bottom
instead
it's happening during your
period

Information:
More information
Find out more about blood in urine on the British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) website



