A broken nose usually heals on its own within 3 weeks. Get medical help if it's not getting better or your nose has changed shape.

Check if it's a broken nose
Symptoms of a broken nose include:
pain, swelling and bruising
a crunching or crackling sound when you touch your nose
difficulty breathing through your nose – it might feel blocked
your nose changing shape – for example, it's not as straight as before
A broken nose may cause bruising under your eyes (black eyes).
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/264194/view
You may also have a cut on the bridge of your nose, or a nosebleed.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/97267/view

How to treat a broken nose yourself
You can usually treat a broken nose yourself. It should start getting better within 3 days and be fully healed within 3 weeks.
Do
hold an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a tea towel on your nose for up to 15 minutes, several times a day
take
paracetamol
to relieve pain
treat nosebleeds by sitting or standing upright and leaning forward – if possible, pinch your nose above the nostrils for up to 15 minutes
keep your head upright when lying in bed by adding more pillows – this will help to reduce swelling
treat minor cuts and grazes by stopping any bleeding, cleaning the wound and covering it with a plaster or dressing
Don’t
do not try to straighten your nose yourself if it's changed shape – get help from
111 online
, go to a minor injuries unit or see a GP
do not wear glasses until the swelling has gone down, unless you need them
do not pick or blow your nose until it's healed
do not do strenuous exercise for the first 2 weeks
do not play sports for at least 6 weeks if there's a chance your face might be hit

Information:
If you have a small cut on your nose, find out
how to treat minor cuts and grazes
.

Non-urgent advice:
Go to a minor injuries unit or see a GP if:
your nose is crooked (not straight) after the injury
the swelling has not started to go down after 3 days
painkillers are not helping
you're still finding it difficult to breathe through your nose after the swelling has gone
you're having regular nosebleeds
you have a very high temperature (or you feel hot and shivery)
Find a minor injuries unit

Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
You have a broken nose and:
a nosebleed that will not stop
a large cut or open wound on your nose or face, or something in the wound, such as glass
clear, watery fluid trickling from your nose – this could be a sign of a serious head injury
a severe headache with blurred or double vision
eye pain and double vision
neck pain or a stiff neck with numbness or tingling in your arms
a purple swelling inside your nose – it may be painful or block your breathing
other symptoms of a severe head injury – such as vomiting, collapsing (passing out) or difficulty speaking

Treatment for a broken nose
A GP might prescribe stronger painkillers if paracetamol is not helping with pain caused by a broken nose.
If you have a severe broken nose or it's changed shape, you may be referred to a specialist in hospital for assessment and treatment.
If your nose has changed shape
A doctor in hospital may be able to make your nose straighter using a procedure called manipulation.
You might have to go home and wait for the swelling to go down first, but the procedure should be done within 3 weeks of you breaking your nose, before the bones start to set.
Manipulation is done using local anaesthetic so that your nose is numbed. It does not always make your nose look exactly the same as it was before, but it often helps.
If you have a large wound
The wound will usually be cleaned and sealed with stitches or strips in hospital.

