Bursitis is when
the fluid-filled sacs (bursa) that cushion the joints have become painful and swollen (inflamed). It can usually be treated at home and should go away in a few weeks.

Check if you have bursitis
You might have bursitis if 1 of your joints is:
painful – usually a dull, achy pain
tender or warmer than surrounding skin
swollen
more painful when you move it or press on it
The area may also be red. This can be harder to see on brown or black skin.
Bursitis can affect any joint, but it's most common in the shoulders, hips, elbows or knees.

How to treat bursitis yourself
If you have bursitis, to help bring down swelling and pain you can:
rest – try not to move the joint too much and avoid activities that put pressure on it
use ice – gently hold an ice pack (or a bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a tea towel on the area for around 10 minutes at a time and repeat every few hours during the day
take painkillers, such as
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
, to ease any pain
It may also help to put extra cushions around the affected joint while you sleep, to help protect and support it.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your bursitis symptoms have not improved or are getting worse after treating it yourself for 1 to 2 weeks
you have a high temperature, or you feel hot and shivery
you cannot move the affected joint
you have very severe, sharp or shooting pains in the joint

Tests for bursitis
A GP will examine the affected joint to check for bursitis.
They may take a sample of fluid from the joint using a needle (aspiration).
This will be sent off to test for an infection and conditions such as
gout
.
The aspiration may also help your symptoms. It might be done in your GP surgery or you may be referred to the hospital.
You may also have other tests such as a blood test or a scan.

Treatments for bursitis
Treatments you may have for bursitis include:
antibiotics
– usually taken for at least 7 days if bursitis is caused by an infection
a
steroid injection
given into the affected joint to reduce the swelling – this will not be done if bursitis is caused by an infection
taking fluid from the joint using a needle (aspiration) to ease symptoms
If bursitis is severe or keeps coming back, the inflamed bursa may need to be surgically drained or even removed (but this is rare).

How to stop bursitis coming back
There are some things you can do to help stop bursitis coming back.
Do
maintain a healthy weight – being overweight puts more pressure on your joints
clean any cuts on the joints to prevent infections
warm up properly before exercising and playing sport
use padding when putting a lot of pressure on joints (for example, when kneeling)
take regular breaks if you do things that put pressure on a joint, like kneeling
Don’t
do not knock or bang your joints

