Cancer is a condition where cells in a specific part of the body grow and reproduce uncontrollably. The cancerous cells can invade and destroy surrounding healthy tissue, including organs.
Cancer sometimes begins in one part of the body before spreading to other areas. This process is known as metastasis.
1 in 2 people will develop some form of cancer during their lifetime. In the UK, the 4 most common types of cancer are:
breast cancer
lung cancer
prostate cancer
bowel cancer
There are more than 200 different types of cancer, and each is diagnosed and treated in a particular way. You can find links on this page to information about other types of cancer.

Spotting signs of cancer
Changes to your body's normal processes or unusual, unexplained symptoms can sometimes be an early sign of cancer.
Symptoms that need to be checked by a doctor include:
a lump that suddenly appears on your body
unexplained bleeding
changes to your bowel habits
But in many cases your symptoms will not be related to cancer and will be caused by other, non-cancerous health conditions.
Read more about the
signs and symptoms of cancer
.

Reducing your risk of cancer
Making some simple changes to your lifestyle can significantly reduce your risk of developing cancer.
For example:
healthy eating
taking
regular exercise
not smoking
Find out more about how a healthy lifestyle reduces your chances of developing cancer on the Macmillan Cancer Support website

Cancer treatment
Surgery is the first treatment to try for most types of cancer, as solid tumours can usually be surgically removed.
2 other commonly used treatment methods are:
chemotherapy
– powerful cancer-killing medicines
radiotherapy
– the controlled use of high-energy
X-rays

Waiting times
Accurately diagnosing cancer can take weeks or months. As cancer often develops slowly over several years, waiting for a few weeks will not usually impact on the effectiveness of treatment.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has produced referral guidelines for suspected cancer
.
You should not have to wait more than 2 weeks to see a specialist if your GP suspects you have cancer and urgently refers you.
In cases where cancer has been confirmed, you should not have to wait more than 31 days from the decision to treat to the start of treatment.
NHS England has more detailed statistics on cancer waiting times

Cancer services
Find local cancer support services
Find cancer support services for women

Other cancer pages
The Health A-Z covers many different types of cancer:
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Anal cancer
Bile duct cancer
Bladder cancer
Bone cancer
Bowel cancer
Brain tumour (cancerous)
Brain tumour (non-cancerous)
Breast cancer (female)
Breast cancer (male)
Carcinoid tumours
Cervical cancer
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
Endometrial cancer
Ewing sarcoma
Eye cancer
Gallbladder cancer
Hairy cell leukaemia
Head and neck cancer
Hodgkin lymphoma
Kaposi's sarcoma
Kidney cancer
Laryngeal cancer
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Mesothelioma
Mouth cancer
Multiple myeloma
Nasopharyngeal cancer
Neuroendocrine tumours
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Nasal and sinus cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Ovarian cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Penile cancer
Prostate cancer
Rectal cancer
Retinoblastoma
Skin cancer (melanoma)
Skin cancer (non-melanoma)
Soft tissue sarcoma
Stomach cancer
Testicular cancer
Thyroid cancer
Vaginal cancer
Vulval cancer
Womb cancer

Information:
Social care and support guide
The
guide to care and support
explains your options and where you can get support if you:
need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability
care for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled – including family members

