Most chest pain is not a sign of anything serious but you should get medical advice just in case. Get immediate medical help if you think you're having a heart attack.

Immediate action required:
Call 999 if:
You have sudden chest pain that:
spreads to your arms, back, neck or jaw
makes your chest feel tight or heavy
also started with shortness of breath, sweating and feeling or being sick
lasts more than 15 minutes
You could be having a
heart attack
. Call 999 immediately as you need immediate treatment in hospital.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have chest pain that comes and goes
you have chest pain that goes away quickly but you're still worried
It's important to get medical advice to make sure it's nothing serious.

Common causes of chest pain
Chest pain has many different causes. In most cases, chest pain is not caused by a heart problem.
Your symptoms might give you an idea of the cause. Do not self-diagnose – see a GP if you're worried.
Possible causes of chest pain.
Chest pain symptoms
Possible cause
Starts after eating, bringing up food or bitter tasting fluids, feeling full and bloated
Heartburn
or
indigestion
Starts after chest injury or chest exercise, feels better when resting the muscle
Chest
sprain or strain
Triggered by worries or a stressful situation, heartbeat gets faster, sweating, dizziness
Anxiety or panic
Gets worse when you breathe in and out, coughing up yellow or green mucus, high temperature
Chest infection
or
pneumonia
Tingling feeling on skin, skin rash appears that turns into blisters
Shingles

Chest pain and heart problems
The most common heart problems that cause chest pain include:
pericarditis
– which usually causes a sudden, sharp, stabbing pain that gets worse when you breathe deeply or lie down
angina
or a
heart attack
– which have similar symptoms but a heart attack is life-threatening
You're more likely to have heart problems if you're older or know you're at risk of
coronary heart disease
.
For example, if you:
smoke
are
very overweight (obese)
have
high blood pressure
,
diabetes
or
high cholesterol
have a history of heart attacks or angina in family members under 60 years old



