Cold sores are common and usually clear up on their own within 10 days. But there are things you can do to help ease the pain.

Check if it's a cold sore
A cold sore usually starts with a tingling, itching or burning feeling.
Over the next 48 hours:
Small fluid-filled blisters appear.
Credit:
SCIENCE SOURCE/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/257566/view
The blisters can appear anywhere on the face.
Credit:
PAN XUNBIN/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/479137/view
The blisters burst and crust over into a scab.
Credit:
C0473050, DR P. MARAZZI / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/1051811/view/cold-sore-on-lip
Cold sores should start to heal within 10 days, but are contagious and may be irritating or painful while they heal.
Some people find that certain things trigger a cold sore, such as another illness, sunshine or menstrual periods.

When it's not a cold sore
Other possible causes of your symptoms
Symptoms
Possible cause
Painful red spot on the face filled with pus
Spot or
boil
Blister on the inside of the lip or mouth
Mouth ulcer
Red sores or blisters on the face that become crusty, golden-brown patches
Impetigo

How long cold sores are contagious
Cold sores are contagious from the moment you first feel tingling or other signs of a cold sore coming on to when the cold sore has completely healed.

A pharmacist can help with cold sores
A pharmacist can recommend:
creams to ease pain and irritation
antiviral creams to speed up healing time
cold sore patches to protect the skin while it heals
You can buy electronic devices from pharmacies that treat cold sores with light or lasers.
Some people find these helpful, but there have not been many studies to confirm if they work.
Information:
If you regularly get cold sores, use antiviral creams as soon as you recognise the early tingling feeling. They do not always work after blisters appear.

Find a pharmacy

Things you can do yourself
Cold sores take time to heal and they're very contagious, especially when the blisters burst.
Important
Kissing a baby if you have a cold sore can lead to
neonatal herpes
, which is very dangerous to newborn babies.
Do
eat cool, soft foods
wash your hands with soap and water before and after applying cream
avoid anything that triggers your cold sores
use sunblock lip balm (SPF 15 or above) if you're outside in the sun
take
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
to ease pain and swelling (
liquid paracetamol is available for children
) – do not give aspirin to children under 16
drink plenty of fluids to avoid
dehydration
Don’t
do not kiss anyone while you have a cold sore
do not have oral sex until your cold sore completely heals as you could give your partner
genital herpes
do not touch your cold sore (apart from applying cream) – if you do wash your hands
do not rub cream into the cold sore – dab it on instead
do not eat acidic or salty food if it makes your cold sore feel worse

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the cold sore has not started to heal within 10 days
you're worried about a cold sore or think it's something else
the cold sore is very large or painful
you or your child also have swollen, painful gums and sores in the mouth (gingivostomatitis)
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because of chemotherapy or diabetes

Treatment from a GP
A GP may prescribe antiviral tablets if your cold sores are very large, painful or keep coming back.
Newborn babies, pregnant women and people with a weakened immune system may be referred to hospital for advice or treatment.

Why cold sores come back
Cold sores are caused by a virus called herpes simplex.
Once you have the virus, it stays in your skin for the rest of your life. Sometimes it causes a cold sore.
Most people are exposed to the virus when they're young after close skin to skin contact, such as kissing, with someone who has a cold sore.
It does not usually cause any symptoms until you're older. You will not know if it's in your skin unless you get a cold sore.



