You can often treat a cold without seeing a GP. You should begin to feel better in about 1 to 2 weeks.

Check if you have a cold
Cold symptoms come on gradually and can include:
a blocked or runny nose
a sore throat
headaches
muscle aches
coughs
sneezing
a raised temperature
pressure in your ears and face
loss of taste and smell
The symptoms are the same in adults and children. Sometimes symptoms last longer in children.

Telling the difference between cold and flu
Cold and
flu
symptoms are similar, but flu tends to be more severe.
Difference between cold and flu
Cold
Flu
Appears gradually
Appears quickly within a few hours
Affects mainly your nose and throat
Affects more than just your nose and throat
Makes you feel unwell, but you're OK to carry on as normal (for example, go to work)
Makes you feel exhausted and too unwell to carry on as normal

How you can treat a cold yourself
To help you get better more quickly:
rest and sleep
drink plenty of water (fruit juice or squash mixed with water is OK) to avoid dehydration
gargle salt water to soothe a
sore throat
(not suitable for children)
If you have a high temperature or you do not feel well enough to do your normal activities, try to stay at home and avoid contact with other people until you feel better.
A pharmacist can help with cold medicines
You can buy cough and cold medicines from pharmacies or supermarkets. A pharmacist can advise you on the best medicine.
You can:
ease aches or lower a temperature with painkillers like
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
relieve a blocked nose with
decongestant
sprays or tablets
Decongestants should not be given to children under 6. Children aged 6 to 12 should take them for no longer than 5 days.
Be careful not to use cough and cold medicines if you're taking paracetamol and ibuprofen tablets. Cough and cold medicines often also contain paracetamol and ibuprofen so it can be easy to take more than the recommended dose.
Some are not suitable for children, babies and pregnant women.
There's little evidence that supplements (such as vitamin C, echinacea or garlic) prevent colds or speed up recovery.
Find a pharmacy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your symptoms do not improve after 3 weeks
your symptoms get suddenly worse
your temperature is very high or you feel hot and shivery
you're concerned about your child's symptoms
you're feeling short of breath or develop chest pain
you have a long-term medical condition – for example, diabetes, or a heart, lung or kidney condition
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because you're having chemotherapy
Antibiotics
GPs do not recommend antibiotics for colds because they will not relieve your symptoms or speed up your recovery.
Antibiotics are only effective against bacterial infections, and colds are caused by viruses.

How to avoid spreading a cold
Colds are caused by viruses and easily spread to other people. You're infectious until all your symptoms have gone. This usually takes 1 to 2 weeks.
Colds are spread by germs from coughs and sneezes, which can live on hands and surfaces for 24 hours.
To reduce the risk of spreading a cold:
wash your hands often with warm water and soap
use tissues to trap germs when you cough or sneeze
bin used tissues as quickly as possible

How to prevent catching a cold
A person with a cold can start spreading it from a few days before their symptoms begin until the symptoms have finished.
The best ways to avoid catching a cold are:
washing your hands with warm water and soap
not sharing towels or household items (like cups) with someone who has a cold
not touching your eyes or nose in case you have come into contact with the virus – it can infect the body this way
staying fit and healthy
The flu vaccine helps prevent flu but not colds.

See how to wash your hands correctly
Video: How to wash your hands
Watch this video to find out the best way to wash your hands.
Media last reviewed: 15 March 2023
Media review due: 15 March 2026



