A cough will usually clear up on its own within 3 to 4 weeks.

How you can treat a cough yourself
There's usually no need to see a GP if you have a cough.
You should:
rest
drink plenty of fluids
try to stay at home and avoid contact with other people if you have a high temperature or you do not feel well enough to do your normal activities
You could also try:
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
to treat any pain
hot lemon and honey (not suitable for babies under 1 year old)
a herbal medicine called pelargonium (suitable for people aged 12 or over)
But there's limited evidence to show these work. Hot lemon with honey has a similar effect to cough medicines.
How to make a hot lemon and honey drink
Squeeze half a lemon into a mug of boiled water.
Add 1 to 2 teaspoons of honey.
Drink while still warm (do not give hot drinks to small children).

A pharmacist can help if you have a cough
If you have a cough, you can ask a pharmacist about:
cough syrup
cough medicine (some cough medicines should not be given to children under 12)
cough sweets
These will not stop your cough, but may help you cough less.
Decongestants and cough medicines containing codeine will not stop your cough.
Find a pharmacy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you've had a cough for more than 3 weeks (persistent cough)
your cough is very bad or quickly gets worse – for example, you have a hacking cough or cannot stop coughing
you feel very unwell
you have chest pain
you're losing weight for no reason
the side of your neck feels swollen and painful (swollen glands)
you find it hard to breathe
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because of chemotherapy or diabetes
See a GP urgently if you're coughing up blood.

What happens at your appointment
To find out what's causing your cough, the GP might:
take a sample of any mucus you might be coughing up
order an X-ray, allergy test, or a test to see how well your lungs work
refer you to hospital to see a specialist, but this is rare

Important
Antibiotics
are not normally prescribed for coughs. A GP will only prescribe them if you need them – for example, if you have a bacterial infection or you're at risk of complications.

What causes coughs
Most coughs are caused by a cold or flu.
Other causes include:
smoking
heartburn (acid reflux)
allergies – for example, hay fever
infections like bronchitis
mucus dripping down the throat from the back of the nose
A cough is rarely a sign of something serious like lung cancer.

Video: coughs
In this video, a GP describes the most common causes of coughs and how they can be treated.
Media last reviewed: 1 May 2021
Media review due: 1 May 2024



