Dandruff is a common skin condition. It's not harmful and you cannot catch it.

Check if it's dandruff
Dandruff causes white or grey flakes of skin to appear on the scalp and in the hair.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/256156/view
The flakes are often more noticeable in darker hair and if they fall from your scalp onto your shoulders.
Your scalp may also feel dry and
itchy
.

How to treat dandruff yourself
Use an anti-dandruff shampoo to treat dandruff. There are several different types you can buy from pharmacies or supermarkets.
Look for a shampoo that contains 1 of these ingredients:
zinc pyrithione
salicylic acid
selenium sulphide (or selenium sulfide)
ketoconazole
coal tar
A pharmacist can tell you how to use the shampoo.
Use the shampoo for a month to see if your dandruff gets better. You might need to try more than 1 type to find a shampoo that works for you.
Find a pharmacy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you still have dandruff symptoms after using anti-dandruff shampoo for a month
your dandruff is bad or your scalp is very itchy
your scalp is red or swollen
you have flaky, itchy patches on your face or other parts of your body
The GP can check your scalp for skin conditions that could be causing your dandruff.

Causes of dandruff
Dandruff is not caused by poor hygiene, although it may be more obvious if you do not wash your hair regularly.
Stress and cold weather may also make dandruff worse.
A list of conditions that cause dandruff and their main symptoms.
Symptoms
Possible causes
Scaly, itchy and red patches on skin on scalp, face and other areas of the body
Seborrheic dermatitis
Red or silver rash on scalp, sometimes with patchy hair loss
Tinea capitis, known as ringworm
Dry, red, flaky and very itchy skin on areas of the body
Eczema
Red, irritated skin, may also have blisters and cracked skin; reaction to products such as hair dye, sprays, gels or mousses
Contact dermatitis
Red, flaky, crusty and sore patches of skin covered with silvery scales
Psoriasis
Greasy, yellowish crusts on baby's scalp, eyebrows and nappy area
Cradle cap

Information:
Do not worry if you're not sure what's causing your dandruff. Follow the advice on this page and see a GP if things do not get better in a month.

