A high temperature (fever) is very common in young children. The temperature usually returns to normal within 3 or 4 days.

Checking a high temperature
A normal temperature in babies and children is about 36.4C, but this can vary slightly from child to child.
A high temperature is 38C or more.
If your child has a high temperature, they might:
feel hotter than usual when you touch their back or chest
feel sweaty
look or feel unwell
Use a digital thermometer, which you can buy from pharmacies and supermarkets, to take your child's temperature.

How to take your child's temperature
Place the thermometer inside the top of the armpit.
Gently close the arm over the thermometer and keep it pressed to the side of the body.
Leave the thermometer in place for as long as it says in the instruction leaflet. Some digital thermometers beep when they're ready.
Remove the thermometer. The display will show your child's temperature.
If your child's just had a bath or been wrapped in a blanket, their temperature may be higher for a short time. Wait a few minutes then try again.

What to do if your child has a high temperature
If your child or baby has a high temperature, you can usually look after them at home. The temperature should go down over 3 or 4 days.
Do
give them plenty of fluids
look out for
signs of dehydration
give them food if they want it
check on your child regularly during the night
keep them at home
give them
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
if they're distressed or unwell – check the packaging or leaflet to make sure the medicine is suitable for your child, or speak to a pharmacist or GP if you're not sure
get medical advice if you're worried about your child
Don’t
do not undress your child or sponge them down to cool them – a high temperature is a natural and healthy response to infection
do not cover them up in too many clothes or bedclothes
do not give aspirin to children under 16 years of age
do not combine ibuprofen and paracetamol, unless a GP tells you to
do not give paracetamol to a child under 2 months
do not give ibuprofen to a child under 3 months or under 5kg
do not give ibuprofen to children with
asthma
unless it's been recommended by a doctor

Read more about giving medicines to babies and children

Urgent advice:
Call 111 or your GP surgery now if your child:
is under 3 months old and has a temperature of 38C or higher, or you think they have a high temperature
is 3 to 6 months old and has a temperature of 39C or higher, or you think they have a high temperature
has other signs of illness, such as a
rash
, as well as a high temperature
has a high temperature that's lasted for 5 days or more
does not want to eat, or is not their usual self and you're worried
has a high temperature that does not come down with paracetamol
is dehydrated – such as nappies that are not very wet, sunken eyes, and no tears when they're crying

Immediate action required:
Call 999 if your child:
has a stiff neck
has a rash that does not fade when you press a glass against it
is bothered by light
has a fit (
febrile seizure
) for the first time (they cannot stop shaking)
has unusually cold hands and feet
has blue, pale or blotchy skin, lips or tongue
has a weak, high-pitched cry that's not like their normal cry
is drowsy and hard to wake
is extremely agitated (does not stop crying) or is confused
finds it hard to breathe and sucks their stomach in under their ribs
is not responding like they normally do, or is not interested in feeding or normal activities

Causes of a high temperature in children
A high temperature is the body's natural response to fighting infections like coughs and colds.
Many things can cause a high temperature in children, from common childhood illnesses like
chickenpox
and
tonsillitis
, to vaccinations.

Video: Caring for children with fever at home
Watch this video on how to help a child with fever recover as quickly as possible.
Media last reviewed: 1 June 2023
Media review due: 1 June 2026

