Frozen shoulder means your shoulder is painful and stiff for months, sometimes years. It can be treated with shoulder exercises and painkillers.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have shoulder pain and stiffness that does not go away – pain can be worse at night when sleeping
the pain is so bad it makes it hard to move your arm and shoulder
These are symptoms of frozen shoulder.

Treatment for frozen shoulder
Broadly, treatment works in 3 main steps:
Pain relief – avoid movements that cause you pain. Only move your shoulder gently. Use
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
to ease the pain.
Stronger pain and swelling relief – prescribed painkillers. Maybe
steroid injections
in your shoulder to bring down the swelling.
Getting movement back – shoulder exercises once it's less painful. This can be at home or with a physiotherapist.
You may get a mix of these treatments depending on how painful and stiff your shoulder is.
Stronger pain relief is usually only used for a short time because it can cause side effects.

Physiotherapy for frozen shoulder
Physiotherapy can help you get movement back in your shoulder.
A physiotherapist will decide on the number of sessions you need. The exact number depends on how your shoulder responds to treatment.
The physiotherapist will first check how much movement you have in your shoulders.
Treatments from a physiotherapist include:
stretching exercises
strength exercises
good posture advice
pain relief advice
If you're still in pain after you have finished your sessions, go back to your GP or physiotherapist. They might prescribe more physiotherapy or try another treatment.
Many physiotherapists work at GP surgeries. In some areas, you can ask to see a physiotherapist without seeing a GP first.
You can also get physiotherapy privately.
Find a registered physiotherapist on the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy website

How long frozen shoulder lasts
Frozen shoulder can take at least 1.5 to 3 years to get better. Sometimes it can be longer.
But the pain and stiffness will usually go away eventually.

How you can ease pain from frozen shoulder yourself
Do
follow any exercises from your GP or physiotherapist
move your shoulder – keeping it still will make the pain worse
try heat packs on your shoulder
Don’t
do not make up your own strenuous exercises – for example, gym equipment can make the pain worse

Putting heat packs on your shoulder
Try putting a hot water bottle wrapped in a tea towel on your shoulder for up to 20 minutes.
You can also buy heat packs from a pharmacy.

Causes of frozen shoulder
It's often not clear why people get a frozen shoulder.
Frozen shoulder happens when the tissue around your shoulder joint becomes inflamed.
The tissue then gets tighter and shrinks, which causes pain.
Frozen shoulder can happen because:
you had an injury or surgery that keeps you from moving your arm normally
you have diabetes – it's still unclear why this is, but it's important to have your
regular diabetes check-ups
to catch any problems early

