There are lots of causes of heel pain. You can usually ease the pain yourself. But see a GP if the pain does not improve.

How to ease heel pain yourself
If you see a GP, they'll usually suggest you try these things:
Do
rest and raise your heel when you can
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) in a towel on your heel for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
wear wide comfortable shoes with a low heel and soft sole
use soft insoles or heel pads in your shoes
wrap a bandage around your heel and ankle to support it
try regular gentle stretching exercises
use painkillers such as
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen gel
(or ibuprofen tablets if needed)
Don’t
do not walk or stand for long periods, especially barefoot
do not wear high heels or tight pointy shoes
A pharmacist can help with heel pain
You can ask a pharmacist about:
the best painkiller to take for your heel pain
insoles and pads for your shoes
treatments for common skin problems that can affect the heel
if you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy

Video: exercises to reduce heel pain
This video demonstrates exercises that can help reduce heel pain.
Media last reviewed: 1 April 2022
Media review due: 1 April 2025
See exercise video safety information
The exercises in this series of videos are suitable for most people in good health with a reasonable level of fitness.
Unless stated otherwise, they are general exercises only and are not aimed at treating any specific cause of pain or condition. Video titles and descriptions can give more information on how difficult the exercises are and who they are for.
Get advice from a healthcare professional before trying them if:
you are not sure if the exercises are suitable for your current level of fitness
you have a health problem, an injury, any symptoms, are feeling unwell, or you have had a recent health event such as a heart attack or operation
you have any other concerns about your health
you are pregnant or have recently given birth
Stop the exercise immediately if you feel any pain or become unwell. If you are concerned about any symptoms, or they do not go away,
get help from 111 online
or call 111 for advice.

Help us improve our website
Can you answer a few questions about your visit today?
Click here to take our survey

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
heel pain is severe or stopping you doing normal activities
the pain is getting worse or keeps coming back
the pain has not improved after treating it at home for 2 weeks
you have any tingling or loss of sensation in your foot
you have diabetes and have heel pain – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
What we mean by severe pain
Severe pain:
always there and so bad it's hard to think or talk
you cannot sleep
it's very hard to move, get out of bed, go to the bathroom, wash or dress
Moderate pain:
always there
makes it hard to concentrate or sleep
you can manage to get up, wash or dress
Mild pain:
comes and goes
is annoying but does not stop you doing daily activities

Immediate action required:
Go to an urgent treatment centre or A&E if you:
have severe heel pain after an injury
feel faint, dizzy or sick from the pain
have an ankle or foot that has changed shape or is at an odd angle
heard a snap, grinding or popping noise at the time of injury
are not able to walk
These might be signs of a broken heel bone or broken ankle.
Find an urgent treatment centre
What we mean by severe pain
Severe pain:
always there and so bad it's hard to think or talk
you cannot sleep
it's very hard to move, get out of bed, go to the bathroom, wash or dress
Moderate pain:
always there
makes it hard to concentrate or sleep
you can manage to get up, wash or dress
Mild pain:
comes and goes
is annoying but does not stop you doing daily activities

Common causes of heel pain
Heel pain is often caused by exercising too much or wearing shoes that are too tight.
Your symptoms might also give you an idea of what's causing your heel pain.
Possible causes of heel pain.
Symptoms
Possible cause
Sharp pain between your arch and heel, feels worse when you start walking and better when resting, difficulty raising toes off floor
Plantar fasciitis
Pain in the back of the heel, and in the ankle and calf
Achilles tendonitis
Redness and swelling, dull aching pain in heel
Bursitis
Sudden sharp pain in heel, swelling, a popping or snapping sound during the injury, difficulty walking
Heel fracture or ruptured Achilles tendon

Information:
Do not worry if you're not sure what the problem is.
Follow the advice on this page and see a GP if the pain does not get better in 2 weeks.

