If you're feeling like you want to die, it's important to tell someone.
Help and support is available right now if you need it. You do not have to struggle with difficult feelings alone.

Phone a helpline
These free helplines are there to help when you're feeling down or desperate.
Unless it says otherwise, they're open 24 hours a day, every day.
You can also call these helplines for advice if you're worried about someone else.
Information:
Samaritans
– for everyone
Call 116 123
Email
jo@samaritans.org
Information:
Campaign Against Living Miserably (CALM)
Call 0800 58 58 58
– 5pm to midnight every day
Visit
the
webchat page
Information:
Papyrus – prevention of young suicide HOPELINE247
Call 0800 068 41 41
Text 07860 039967
Email
pat@papyrus-uk.org
Information:
Childline
– for children and young people under 19
Call 0800 1111
– the number will not show up on your phone bill
Information:
SOS Silence of Suicide
– for everyone
Call 0300 1020 505
– 4pm to midnight every day
Email
support@sossilenceofsuicide.org
Message a text line
If you do not want to talk to someone over the phone, these text lines are open 24 hours a day, every day.
Information:
Shout Crisis Text Line
– for everyone
Text "SHOUT" to 85258
Information:
YoungMinds Crisis Messenger
– for people under 19
Text "YM" to 85258

Talk to someone you trust
Let family or friends know what's going on for you. They may be able to offer support and help keep you safe.
There's no right or wrong way to talk about suicidal feelings – starting the conversation is what's important.

Who else you can talk to
If you find it difficult to talk to someone you know, you could:
call a GP
– ask for an emergency appointment
call 111
out of hours – they will help you find the support and help you need
contact your mental health crisis team
– if you have one
Important
Is your life in danger?
If you have seriously harmed yourself – for example, by taking a drug overdose – or you feel that you may be about to harm yourself, call 999 for an ambulance or go straight to A&E.
Or ask someone else to call 999 or take you to A&E.

Tips for coping right now
try not to think about the future – just focus on getting through today
stay away from drugs and alcohol
get yourself to a safe place, like a friend's house
be around other people
do something you usually enjoy, such as spending time with a pet
See more tips from Rethink

Worried about someone else?
If you're worried about someone, try to get them to talk to you. Ask open-ended questions like: "How do you feel about...?"
Do not worry about having the answers. Just listening to what someone has to say and taking it seriously can be more helpful.
See Samaritans' tips on how to support someone you're worried about
Read Rethink's advice on how to support someone who is having suicidal thoughts

Information:
Making a safety plan
If you struggle with suicidal thoughts or are supporting someone else, it may help to make a safety plan to use if you need it:
the
Staying Safe website
provides information on how to make a safety plan, including video tutorials and online templates to guide you through the process
you can also get information on
planning for a mental health crisis from mental health charity Mind

