Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia) is a condition where people fall asleep repeatedly during the day.

Check if it's hypersomnia
Excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia) is different from feeling tired all the time.
If you have hypersomnia, you may:
regularly nap during the day
fall asleep during the day
still sleep for long hours at night

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you often fall asleep during the day
sleepiness is affecting your life

What happens at your appointment
To find out why you're sleeping excessively, a GP might:
ask you about possible causes of your sleepiness, such as mental or physical health problems, or any medicines you may be taking
suggest you keep a diary of when you sleep
refer you to a doctor who specialises in sleep disorders
Treatment for excessive sleepiness will depend on what's causing it. It may include medicine to help keep you awake.

Causes of hypersomnia
Sometimes other conditions may be related to excessive sleepiness (hypersomnia). These conditions can have additional symptoms.
Symptoms and possible causes
Additional symptoms
Possible cause
Additional symptoms
Feeling the need to sleep anywhere, sometimes without warning
Possible cause
Narcolepsy
Additional symptoms
Loud snorting, breathing and snoring at night
Possible cause
Sleep apnoea
Additional symptoms
An unusual feeling in your legs, particularly at night
Possible cause
Restless legs syndrome
Additional symptoms
Low mood, little interest in things
Possible cause
Depression
Additional symptoms
Mood swings that range from extreme highs (mania) to extreme lows
Possible cause
Bipolar disorder
Additional symptoms
Problems recovering after physical activity, problems with thinking, memory or concentration
Possible cause
Myalgic encephalomyelitis or chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)
Some medicines, drinking too much alcohol and taking drugs can also cause excessive daytime sleepiness.
Idiopathic hypersomnia
Idiopathic hypersomnia is when someone sleeps for long periods and wakes up feeling confused or irritable (known as sleep inertia) and not refreshed.
There's no known cause for idiopathic hypersomnia.

Things you can try to help your sleeping habits
Changing your sleep habits may not cure excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia), but it might help you feel better.
Try to:
go to bed at the same time every night
avoid drinking alcohol and caffeine
create a peaceful sleeping environment
if possible, avoid medicines that can cause drowsiness
avoid working late into the night
It might also help to talk to your family and friends about your excessive daytime sleepiness so they're aware of it.

Information:
If you're diagnosed with hypersomnia you'll need to tell the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) and you may not be able to drive.
Find out about the rules on excessive sleepiness and driving from GOV.UK

