What is high blood pressure?
Blood pressure is recorded with 2 numbers. The systolic pressure (higher number) is the force at which your heart pumps blood around your body.
The diastolic pressure (lower number) is the resistance to the blood flow in the blood vessels between heartbeats when blood is pumped around your heart.
They're both measured in millimetres of mercury (mmHg).
As a general guide:
high blood pressure is considered to be from 140/90mmHg or more if your reading was taken at a pharmacy, GP surgery or clinic (or an average of 135/85mmHg if it was taken at home)
if you're over the age of 80, high blood pressure is considered to be from 150/90mmHg or more if your reading was taken at a pharmacy, GP surgery or clinic (or an average of 145/85mmHg if it was taken at home)
ideal blood pressure is usually considered to be between 90/60mmHg and 120/80mmHg, while the target for people over the age of 80 years old is below 150/90mmHg (or 145/85mmHg if it was taken at home)
Blood pressure readings from 121/81mmHg to 139/89mmHg could mean you're at risk of developing high blood pressure if you do not take steps to keep your blood pressure under control.
Everyone's blood pressure will be slightly different. What's considered low or high for you may be normal for someone else.
Information:
Understanding your blood pressure reading
If you have a recent blood pressure reading use the
NHS Check your blood pressure tool
to understand what your reading means. You'll also get information about what to do next.

Risks of high blood pressure
If your blood pressure is too high, it puts extra strain on your blood vessels, heart and other organs, such as the brain, kidneys and eyes.
Persistent high blood pressure can increase your risk of a number of serious and potentially life-threatening health conditions, such as:
heart disease
heart attacks
strokes
heart failure
peripheral arterial disease
aortic aneurysms
kidney disease
vascular dementia
If you have high blood pressure, reducing it even a small amount can help lower your risk of these health conditions.

Check your blood pressure
The only way of knowing whether you have high blood pressure is to have a
blood pressure test
.
All adults over 40 years old are advised to have their blood pressure checked at least every 5 years.
Some people from African, Afro-Caribbean or South Asian heritage may have high blood pressure at a younger age and are encouraged to get their blood pressure checked earlier.
Getting this done is easy and could save your life.
You can get your blood pressure tested at a number of places, including:
at most pharmacies
at your GP surgery
as part of your
NHS Health Check
in some workplaces
You can also check your blood pressure yourself with a home blood pressure monitor.
Find out more about getting a blood pressure test
Information:
Get a free blood pressure check
If you're aged 40 and over, and are eligible, you may be able to get a free blood pressure check at a local pharmacy.
Find a pharmacy that offers free blood pressure checks

Things that can increase your risk of getting high blood pressure
It's not always clear what causes high blood pressure, but there are things that can increase your risk.
You might be more at risk if you:
are overweight
eat too much salt and do not eat enough fruit and vegetables
do not do enough exercise
drink too much alcohol or coffee (or other caffeine-based drinks)
smoke
have a lot of stress
are over 65 years old
have a relative with high blood pressure
are of black African or Black Caribbean descent
live in a deprived area
Making healthy lifestyle changes can sometimes help reduce your chances of getting high blood pressure and help lower your blood pressure if it's already high.
High blood pressure is also sometimes caused by an underlying health condition or taking a certain medicine.

Treatment for high blood pressure
Doctors can help you keep your blood pressure to a safe level using:
lifestyle changes
medicines
What works best is different for each person.
Talk to your doctor to help you decide about treatment.
This
patient decision aid from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (PDF, 132kb)
can also help you to understand your treatment options.

Lifestyle changes to reduce blood pressure
These lifestyle changes can help prevent and lower high blood pressure:
reduce the amount of salt you eat and have a generally healthy diet
cut back on alcohol
lose weight
if you're overweight
exercise
regularly
cut down on caffeine
stop smoking
Some people with high blood pressure may also need to take 1 or more medicines to stop their blood pressure getting too high.

Medicines for high blood pressure
If you're diagnosed with high blood pressure, your doctor may recommend taking 1 or more medicines to keep it under control.
These come as tablets and usually need to be taken once a day.
Common blood pressure medicines include:
ACE inhibitors – such as
enalapril
,
lisinopril
,
perindopril
and
ramipril
angiotensin-2 receptor blockers (ARBs) – such as
candesartan
,
irbesartan
,
losartan
,
valsartan
and
olmesartan
calcium channel blockers – such as
amlodipine
,
felodipine
and
nifedipine
or
diltiazem
and
verapamil
diuretics – such as
indapamide
and
bendroflumethiazide
beta blockers
– such as
atenolol
and
bisoprolol
alpha blockers – such as
doxazosin
other diuretics – such as amiloride and
spironolactone
The medicine recommended for you will depend on things like how high your blood pressure is, your age and your ethnicity.

