A hysterectomy is a surgical procedure to remove the womb (uterus). You'll no longer be able to get pregnant after the operation.
If you have not already gone through the
menopause
, you'll no longer have periods, regardless of your age.
It's more common for women aged 40 to 50.

Why do I need a hysterectomy?
Hysterectomies are carried out to treat health problems that affect the female reproductive system.
These include:
heavy periods
long-term
pelvic pain
non-cancerous tumours (fibroids)
ovarian cancer
,
womb cancer
,
cervical cancer
or cancer of the fallopian tubes
A hysterectomy is a major operation with a long recovery time and is only considered after less invasive treatments have been tried.
Find out why a hysterectomy is needed

Things to consider
If you have a hysterectomy, as well as having your womb removed, you may have to decide whether to also have your cervix or ovaries removed.
Your decision will usually be based on your personal feelings, medical history and any recommendations your doctor may have.
Find out the things to consider before having a hysterectomy

Types of hysterectomy
There are various types of hysterectomy. The type you have depends on why you need the operation and how much of your womb and surrounding reproductive system can safely be left in place.
The main types of hysterectomy are:
total hysterectomy – the womb and cervix (neck of the womb) are removed; this is the most commonly performed operation
subtotal hysterectomy – the main body of the womb is removed, leaving the cervix in place
total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy – the womb, cervix, fallopian tubes (salpingectomy) and ovaries (oophorectomy) are removed
radical hysterectomy – the womb and surrounding tissues are removed, including the fallopian tubes, part of the vagina, ovaries, lymph glands and fatty tissue
There are 3 ways to carry out a hysterectomy:
laparoscopic hysterectomy (keyhole surgery) – where small cuts are made in the tummy and the womb is removed through a cut in the vagina
vaginal hysterectomy – where the womb is removed through a cut in the top of the vagina
abdominal hysterectomy – where the womb is removed through a cut in the lower tummy
Find out how a hysterectomy is performed

Complications of a hysterectomy
There's a small risk of complications, including:
heavy bleeding
infection
damage to your bladder or bowel
a serious reaction to the
general anaesthetic
Find out more about the complications of a hysterectomy

Recovering from a hysterectomy
A hysterectomy is a major operation. You can be in hospital for up to 5 days after surgery, and it can take about 6 to 8 weeks to fully recover.
Recovery times can also vary depending on the type of hysterectomy.
Rest as much as possible during this time and do not lift anything heavy, such as bags of shopping. You need time for your abdominal muscles and tissues to heal.
Find out more about recovering from a hysterectomy

Surgical menopause
If your ovaries are removed during a hysterectomy, you'll go through the menopause immediately after the operation, regardless of your age. This is known as a surgical menopause.
If 1 or both of your ovaries are left intact, there's a chance you'll have the menopause sooner than you would have if you did not have a hysterectomy.
If you experience a surgical menopause after having a hysterectomy, you should be offered
hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
.

The female reproductive system
The female reproductive system is made up of the:
womb (uterus) – a pear-shaped organ in the middle of your pelvis where a baby develops; the lining of the womb is shed during a period
cervix – the neck of the womb, where the womb meets the vagina; the cervix is the lower part of the womb and not separate
vagina – a muscular tube below the cervix
fallopian tubes – tubes that connect the womb to the ovaries
ovaries – small organs by the fallopian tubes that release an egg each month

