Impetigo is a skin infection that's very contagious but not usually serious. It often gets better in 7 to 10 days if you get treatment. Anyone can get it, but it's very common in young children.

Check if you have impetigo
Impetigo starts with red sores or blisters, but the redness may be harder to see in brown and black skin.
The sores or blisters quickly burst and leave crusty, golden-brown patches.
The patches can:
look a bit like cornflakes stuck to your skin
get bigger
spread to other parts of your body
be itchy
sometimes be painful
Sores (non-bullous impetigo) or blisters (bullous impetigo) can start anywhere – but usually on exposed areas like your face and hands.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/258826/view
The sores or blisters burst and form crusty patches.
Credit:
DR M.A. ANSARY / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/258867/view

If you're not sure it's impetigo
Impetigo can look similar to other skin conditions.
Possible causes of symptoms
Skin symptoms
Possible cause
Blisters on lips or around the mouth
Cold sores
Itchy, dry, cracked, sore
Eczema
Itchy blisters
Shingles
,
chickenpox

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if you or your child:
might have impetigo
had treatment for impetigo but the symptoms change or get worse
had impetigo before and it keeps coming back
Impetigo is very infectious. Check with the GP before you go into the surgery. They may suggest a phone consultation.

Treatment for impetigo from a GP
A GP will check it's not something more serious, like
cellulitis
.
If it's impetigo, they can prescribe hydrogen peroxide cream to speed up your recovery, or antibiotic cream or tablets if it's very bad.
If your impetigo keeps coming back
A GP can take a swab from your skin to check for the bacteria that causes impetigo. They may also take a swab from inside your nose.
They might prescribe an antiseptic body wash, nasal ointment, or both, to try to clear the bacteria and stop the impetigo coming back.
Important:
Make sure you finish treatment
Do not stop taking the antibiotic tablets early, even if the impetigo starts to clear up.

Stop impetigo spreading or getting worse
Impetigo can easily spread to other parts of your body or to other people until it stops being contagious.
It stops being contagious:
48 hours after you start using hydrogen peroxide cream or antibiotics prescribed by your GP
when the patches dry out and crust over (if you do not get treatment)
To help stop impetigo spreading or getting worse while it's still contagious:
Do
stay away from school or work
keep sores, blisters and crusty patches clean and dry
cover them with loose clothing or gauze bandages
wash your hands frequently
wash flannels, sheets and towels at a high temperature
wash or wipe down toys with detergent and warm water if your children have impetigo
Don’t
do not touch or scratch sores, blisters or crusty patches – this also helps stop scarring
do not have close contact with children or people with diabetes or a weakened immune system (if they're having chemotherapy, for example)
do not share flannels, sheets or towels
do not prepare food for other people
do not go to the gym
do not play contact sports like football

How to avoid impetigo
Impetigo usually infects skin that's already damaged.
To avoid spreading the infection to other areas of your body and to other people:
keep cuts, scratches and insect bites clean – for example, by washing them with warm water and soap
get treatment for skin conditions, like
eczema



