Itchy skin is not usually a sign of anything serious. You can often treat it yourself and it will usually go away after a few weeks.

How to treat itchy skin yourself
Sometimes itching is caused by dry, cracked or irritated skin. There are simple things you can do to help ease the itching.
These things may also help stop itchy skin returning and avoid skin damage from scratching.
Do
pat or tap your skin instead of scratching it
hold something cool on your skin, like a damp towel
have cool or lukewarm baths or showers
use an unperfumed moisturiser or
emollient
regularly
keep your nails clean, short and smooth
wear loose cotton or silk clothing
use a laundry liquid or powder that's for sensitive skin
Don’t
do not wear tight clothes, or clothes made from wool or synthetic fabrics
do not spend a long time in the bath or shower
do not use perfumed soaps, deodorants or moisturisers

A pharmacist can help with itchy skin
A pharmacist can tell you what the best products are for itchy skin. For example, medicines called
antihistamines
may help with some causes of itching.
They can also recommend lotions and creams, such as menthol creams that help by cooling the skin.
Tell the pharmacist where your skin is itchy and if you have any other symptoms.
A pharmacist might also be able to tell you:
what you can do to treat it yourself
if you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if itchy skin:
is affecting your daily life
does not get better with self care or keeps coming back
is caused by a new rash, lump or swelling that you're worried about
is all over your body
is severe
happens during pregnancy

Treatment from a GP
A GP might prescribe creams, lotions or tablets, depending on what's causing the itching.
They will look at your skin and ask about your symptoms.
They might arrange a
blood test
, which may help find the cause of your itchy skin.
The GP may also refer you to see a doctor who specialises in skin problems (dermatologist).

Causes of itchy skin
Itchy skin has many possible causes. If you have other symptoms (such as a rash or swelling) this might help to find the cause.
But do not try to diagnose yourself. See a GP if you're worried.
Possible causes of itchy skin
Possible causes
Common skin conditions
Possible causes
Skin reactions to heat or something you're allergic to
Common skin conditions
Allergies
,
hives
,
heat rash (prickly heat)
Possible causes
Long-term skin conditions
Common skin conditions
Dandruff
,
eczema
,
psoriasis
Possible causes
Fungal skin infections
Common skin conditions
Thrush
,
ringworm
,
athlete's foot
Possible causes
Parasites or insects living on the skin
Common skin conditions
Scabies
,
head lice
,
pubic lice
Itchy skin is common during pregnancy.
It’s usually nothing to worry about but it’s important to check with a GP or midwife because it can sometimes be caused by a liver condition called
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP)
.
Itchy skin is also common after the
menopause
. It usually gets better over time.
Less commonly, itchy skin can be a sign of a more serious condition, such as thyroid, liver or kidney problems.

