Joint pain is common, especially as you get older. There are things you can do to ease the pain but get medical help if it's very painful or it does not get better.

Types of joint pain
Common types of joint pain include:
knee pain
shoulder pain
hip pain
foot pain
, including your ankle and toes
hand pain,
including your wrist and fingers
elbow pain
neck pain
You might feel pain in 1 joint, or more than 1 joint at the same time, such as your knees and hips.

Causes of joint pain
There are many possible causes of joint pain. It might be caused by an injury or a longer-lasting problem such as arthritis.
Your symptoms might give you an idea what could be causing the pain. But do not self-diagnose, see a GP if you're worried.
Common causes of joint pain and related symptoms.
Symptoms
Possible cause
Pain, swelling or bruising after intense or repetitive exercise
Sprain or strain
Over the age of 45, pain worse when walking and stiffness after moving
Osteoarthritis
Hot, swollen joint that's more painful when you move it or press on it
Bursitis
Pain and stiffness felt in both sides of your body that's worse after not moving (for example, when you wake up)
Rheumatoid arthritis
Hot, swollen toe joint (usually big toe) with very bad pain that comes on suddenly
Gout
Hot, swollen joint and a high temperature or feeling hot and shivery
Joint infection (
septic arthritis)

How you can ease joint pain
There are some things you can do to ease joint pain.
Do
try to rest the affected joint if you can
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a towel on the painful area for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
take painkillers, such as
ibuprofen
or
paracetamol
, but do not take ibuprofen in the first 48 hours after an injury
try to lose weight if you're overweight
Don’t
do not carry anything heavy
do not completely stop moving the affected joint

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
joint pain is stopping you doing normal activities or affecting your sleep
the pain is getting worse or keeps coming back
the pain has not improved after treating it at home for 2 weeks
your joints are stiff for more than 30 minutes after waking up

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have joint pain and the skin around it is swollen and feels hot
you have joint pain and feel generally unwell and have a high temperature or feel hot and shivery
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.

Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if:
you have very bad joint pain after a fall or injury
you're unable to walk or put weight on a joint
your joint has moved out of place
you have any tingling or you have no feeling in the area around the joint after an injury

Treatments for joint pain
Treatment for joint pain depends on what's causing it. Sometimes the pain might go away without treatment.
A GP might:
prescribe stronger painkillers
prescribe antibiotics if they think you have an infection
refer you for
physiotherapy
refer you to a hospital for a scan or specialist treatment, for example
steroid injections
or surgery

