Joint hypermobility syndrome is when you have very flexible joints and it causes you pain (you may think of yourself as being double-jointed).
It usually affects children and young people and often gets better as you get older.

Symptoms of joint hypermobility syndrome
You or your child may have joint hypermobility syndrome if you:
often get tired, even after rest
keep getting pain and stiffness in your joints or muscles
keep getting sprains and strains
keep dislocating your joints (they "pop out")
have poor balance or co-ordination
have thin, stretchy skin
have bladder or bowel problems
Some people with joint hypermobility syndrome do not have symptoms.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you think you or your child have joint hypermobility syndrome

What happens at your GP appointment
The GP will usually test for joint hypermobility syndrome by checking the flexibility of your joints using a test called the Beighton scoring system.
They may also refer you for a blood test or X-ray to help rule out any other conditions, like arthritis.

Information:
Read more about assessing joint hypermobility with the Beighton scoring system on the Ehlers-Danlos Society website.

Treating joint hypermobility syndrome
There's no cure for joint hypermobility syndrome.
The main treatment is improving muscle strength and fitness so your joints are better protected.
A GP may refer you to a physiotherapist, occupational therapist or podiatrist for specialist advice.
You can also pay for these services privately.
These physical therapies can help to:
reduce pain and the risk of dislocations
improve muscle strength and fitness
improve your posture and balance
Find physiotherapy services
Treating joint pain
Paracetamol
and anti-inflammatory painkillers (like
ibuprofen
, which comes as tablets, gels and sprays) may help to ease pain.
Speak to a pharmacist about the best painkiller for you.
A GP may be able to prescribe stronger painkillers.
If you're in severe pain, a GP may be able to refer you to a pain clinic to help you cope with pain.
To help ease joint pain and stiffness, you can:
have warm baths
use hot water bottles
use heat-rub cream
Find a pharmacy

Joint care you can do yourself
If you have joint hypermobility syndrome, there are things you can do to improve joint and muscle strength and reduce strain.
Do
gentle exercise – start with low-impact exercise like swimming or cycling if you've not been active before (not doing any exercise can make your symptoms worse)
maintain a
healthy weight
wear supportive shoes
wear special insoles (orthotics) in your shoes if a podiatrist has recommended them
Don’t
do not overextend your joints just because you can
do not do repetitive exercises or activities – take regular breaks (called pacing)

What causes joint hypermobility syndrome
Joint hypermobility syndrome can run in families and it cannot be prevented.
Usually, the joints are loose and stretchy because the ligaments that should make them stronger and support them are weak.
The weakness is because the collagen that strengthens the ligaments is different from other people's.
Most experts agree that joint hypermobility syndrome is part of a spectrum of hypermobility disorders which includes
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
.

Information:
More information
Hypermobility Syndromes Association
Ehlers-Danlos Support UK
Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation Trust's patient information leaflet on hypermobility for parents and carers

