Lichen planus is a rash that can affect different parts of your body, including the inside of your mouth. See a GP if you think you might have it.

Check if it's lichen planus
The main symptoms of lichen planus include:
clusters of shiny, raised, purple-red blotches on your arms, legs or body (you may see fine white lines on the blotches) – the rash may be harder to see on black or brown skin
white patches on your gums, tongue or the insides of your cheeks
burning and stinging in your mouth, especially when you eat or drink
bald patches appearing on your scalp
sore red patches on your vulva
rough, thinning nails with grooves on
ring-shaped purple or white patches on your penis
You may only have 1 of these symptoms.
Lichen planus on your skin can be very itchy, but not always.

Lichen planus often appears as purple-red blotches on the inside of your wrist.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/259331/view
Lichen planus can appear as a rash on the inside of your arm.
Credit:
RICHARD USATINE MD / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
:
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/1273821/view
White patches in your mouth may be a symptom of lichen planus.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/459302/view

If you're not sure it's lichen planus
Conditions similar to lichen planus
Symptoms
Possible cause
Symptoms
Red, flaky, crusty patches, often on elbows or knees
Possible cause
Psoriasis
Symptoms
Raised, red, scaly patches on the body
Possible cause
Pityriasis rosea
Symptoms
Itching and white patches on the vulva
Possible cause
Lichen sclerosus
Symptoms
Ring-like red patch anywhere on the body
Possible cause
Ringworm
Symptoms
Itchy, dry, cracked, sore and red skin
Possible cause
Eczema
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you think you have lichen planus

Treatments for lichen planus
Lichen planus on your skin usually gets better on its own in about 9 to 18 months.
Creams and ointments from a GP can help control the rash and ease itching.
If creams and ointments do not work, or you have severe lichen planus, steroid tablets or treatment with a special kind of light (light therapy) can help.
Lichen planus in your mouth can last for several years. Mouthwashes and sprays from a GP can help ease symptoms like burning or sore gums.
You cannot catch lichen planus and it does not usually come back once it's cleared up.

How to ease lichen planus at home
There are things you can do to help ease lichen planus symptoms at home. These will depend on which area of your body is affected.
Lichen planus on the skin
If you have lichen planus on your skin:
wash with warm water – avoid soaps and body washes
wash your hair over a sink or bath so the shampoo does not touch the rest of your skin
a GP may prescribe a moisturising treatment for the skin (emollient) to use on the rash
try not to scratch your skin
Lichen planus on the genitals
If you have lichen planus on your genitals:
try to have showers rather than baths
hold a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a clean tea towel against the affected areas to ease itching and swelling
avoid wearing tights or close-fitting clothes
carefully dry yourself after having a pee to reduce the chances of pee getting in contact with your skin – avoid rubbing the area
use a lubricant if sex is painful
Lichen planus in the mouth
If you have lichen planus in your mouth:
avoid salty, spicy and acidic foods, or alcohol, if they make your mouth sore
brush your teeth carefully twice a day to keep your gums healthy
use a mouthwash that does not contain alcohol, if it makes your mouth sore

