Low blood pressure is a reading of less than 90/60mmHg. It does not always cause symptoms, but you may need treatment if it does.

Symptoms of low blood pressure
Get your blood pressure checked if you keep getting symptoms like:
lightheadedness or dizziness
feeling sick
blurred vision
generally feeling weak
confusion
fainting
This might mean your blood pressure is too low.
If you get symptoms when you stand up or suddenly change position, you may have a type of low blood pressure called postural hypotension.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you keep getting symptoms of low blood pressure such as dizziness and fainting

How to check your blood pressure
You can check your blood pressure:
by asking if a pharmacist can do it
by asking a practice nurse or GP to do it
at home yourself using a home blood pressure monitor
Low blood pressure is a measurement of less than 90/60mmHg.

Find out about monitoring your blood pressure at home and choosing a monitor from Blood Pressure UK

Information:
Understanding your blood pressure reading
If you have a recent blood pressure reading use the
NHS Check your blood pressure tool
to understand what your reading means. You'll also get information about what to do next.

Important:
Regular blood pressure check
If you're 40 to 74 years old, you should have your blood pressure checked at least once every 5 years as part of the
NHS Health Check
.

Treatment for low blood pressure
If a cause for low blood pressure can be found, a GP will be able to recommend treatment to ease your symptoms.
For example, they may suggest:
changing medicines or altering your dose, if this is the cause
wearing support stockings – this can improve circulation and increase blood pressure
Medicine to increase blood pressure is rarely needed because simple lifestyle measures or treating the underlying cause is usually effective.

How to ease low blood pressure symptoms yourself
There are things you can do to help with symptoms of low blood pressure.
Do
get up slowly from sitting to standing
take care when getting out of bed – move slowly from lying to sitting to standing
eat small, frequent meals – lying down or sitting still for a while after eating may also help
increase the amount of water you drink
Don’t
do not sit or stand for long periods
do not bend down or change posture suddenly
do not drink too much alcohol

Causes of low blood pressure
Your blood pressure can vary depending on the time of day.
What you're doing and how you're feeling can also affect it.
There are many possible causes of low blood pressure. It may be low because you're fit and healthy, or you may have inherited it from your parents.
Some people develop low blood pressure as they get older.
It can also be caused by:
being pregnant
some medical conditions, such as
diabetes
some medicines

