Lupus
(systemic lupus erythematosus) is a long-term condition that causes joint pain, skin rashes and tiredness. There's no cure, but symptoms can improve if treatment starts early.

Check if you have lupus
There are lots of possible symptoms of lupus.
The main symptoms include:
joint and muscle pain
extreme tiredness that will not go away no matter how much you rest
rashes that usually come on after being in the sun – the rash is often over the nose and cheeks
You might also have:
headaches
mouth ulcers
a high temperature
hair loss
weight loss
swollen glands, usually in the neck, armpits or groin
depression and anxiety
chest or tummy pain
changes in the colour of your fingers and toes when you're cold, anxious or stressed (
Raynaud's
)
Symptom flare-ups
Lupus often flares up (relapses) and symptoms become worse for a few weeks, sometimes longer.
Symptoms then settle down (remission). The reason why symptoms flare up or settle down is not known.
Some people do not notice any difference and their symptoms are constant.
Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you often get symptoms of lupus
Lupus is better managed if it's found and treated early.

Tests for lupus
Lupus is not always easy to diagnose because the symptoms can be similar to other conditions.
A GP will usually do some blood tests. They may diagnose lupus if the tests show you have high levels of a certain type of antibody, and you also have the typical symptoms of lupus.
You might be referred for X-rays and scans of your heart, kidneys and other organs if the doctor thinks they might be affected.
If lupus is confirmed, you'll be advised to have regular checks and tests, such as blood tests to check for
anaemia
and urine tests to check for kidney problems.
Lupus can range from mild to severe
Severity
How it affects the body
Severity
Mild
How it affects the body
Joint and skin problems, tiredness
Severity
Moderate
How it affects the body
Inflammation of other parts of the skin and body, including your lungs, heart and kidneys
Severity
Severe
How it affects the body
Inflammation causing severe damage to the heart, lungs, brain or kidneys, which can be life- threatening

Treatment for lupus
Treatment you may have for lupus includes:
anti-inflammatory medicines like
ibuprofen
hydroxychloroquine for fatigue and skin and joint problems
steroid tablets, injections and creams for kidney inflammation and rashes
Immunosuppressant or biological medicines are sometimes used to treat severe lupus. They help to calm or control your body's immune system.

Information:
Find out more about lupus and how it's treated on the Versus Arthritis website

Things you can do if you have lupus
Although medicines are important in controlling lupus, you can help manage your symptoms and reduce the risk of it getting worse.
Do
use high-factor (at least factor 50) sunscreen and wear a hat in the sun – you can get sunscreen on prescription if you have lupus
learn to pace yourself to avoid getting too tired
try to stay active, even on a bad day
try relaxation techniques to manage stress – stress can make symptoms worse
tell your employer about your condition – you might be able to adjust your working pattern
ask for help from family, friends and health professionals
eat a
healthy, balanced diet
, including vitamin D and calcium
Don’t
do not smoke – smoking makes lupus worse so it's important to
stop smoking
do not sit in direct sunlight or spend a lot of time in rooms with fluorescent lights

Information:
Help and support
Lupus UK: information, advice and support

Causes of lupus
Lupus is an autoimmune condition. This means the body's natural defence system (immune system) attacks healthy parts of your body.
It's not contagious.
The causes of lupus are not fully understood. Possible causes include:
viral infection
certain medicines
sunlight
puberty
childbirth
menopause
More women than men get lupus, and it's more common in women with an African, Caribbean, Asian or Chinese background.

Lupus in pregnancy
Lupus can cause complications in pregnancy.
See a doctor before trying to get pregnant. They can discuss the risks and check if your medicine needs to be changed.

Video: lupus in children
Watch this video to find out how lupus (an autoimmune condition) affects children.
Media last reviewed: 1 July 2021
Media review due: 1 July 2024

