Mallet finger is an injury to the end of the finger, causing the tip to bend. It's a common sports injury and is treated using a splint.

Check if you have mallet finger
If you have mallet finger the tip of your finger will bend and you will not be able to straighten it.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
:
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/1063101/view
Your finger may also be:
painful or tender
swollen or bruised

Urgent advice:
Get help from NHS 111 if:
You've injured your finger and:
you cannot straighten it
it's painful or tender
it's swollen or bruised
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.
You could also go to
your nearest urgent treatment centre
.

Things you can do before you get medical help
If you think you have mallet finger, there are some things you can do while waiting for medical help.
Do
lift your hand up to reduce swelling
take painkillers to help ease the pain
remove any rings from the finger

Treatment for mallet finger
If you have mallet finger, the finger needs to be kept straight to let the injury heal.
A doctor or nurse will put the finger in a splint, securing it with tape. You'll still be able to bend your finger at the middle joint.
You'll need to:
keep the splinted finger dry – the skin inside the splint can be sore if it gets wet
wear the splint for up to 8 weeks, only removing it to clean your finger and the splint
If the injury does not heal, you may need to wear the splint again for another 8 weeks.
Rarely, you may need surgery.
Cleaning the finger and splint
Clean the finger and splint every day. It's easier to do this if someone can help you.
It's important to keep the fingertip straight when the splint is off.
Rest your finger flat on a table.
Cut the tape and slide the splint off your finger.
Wash the finger and the splint with soap and water.
Dry the finger and splint.
Slide the splint back into place over your finger, keeping the finger straight.
Put new tape on. The middle joint of your finger can move, but it's important the damaged joint cannot move.

Recovering from mallet finger
If you have mallet finger, it can take several months for the finger to get back to normal.
Tenderness, swelling and redness are common for the first few months. The redness may be harder to see on brown or black skin.
You may need to take time off work, depending on your job.
Don’t
do not bend your finger, as the injury will not heal
do not do sports or exercise involving your hands
Information:
The doctor or nurse may give you hand exercises to do around 6 to 8 weeks after your injury happened.

