A meniscus tear is a common type of damage to cartilage in the knee. The cartilage is found between the bones in the knee joint and protects them when you move. It usually gets damaged because of an injury.

Check if you have a meniscus tear
A meniscus tear usually happens when you twist your knee while playing sport. But it can also happen from more minor injuries such as twisting when standing up.
Symptoms of a meniscus tear include:
knee pain
or tenderness
stiffness or swelling around your knee – the swelling may not start for a few hours or days
difficulty bending, straightening or moving your knee
your knee giving way when you try to stand
a crunching or clicking feeling when you move your knee
The symptoms can be similar to
sprains
.

How to ease symptoms of a meniscus tear
There are some things you can do to ease symptoms of a meniscus tear.
Do
stop any exercise or activities and rest your knee when you can during the first few days
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a towel on your knee for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
wrap a bandage around your knee or wear a knee support – remove it when you sleep
keep your leg raised on a pillow as much as possible
take
paracetamol
to ease pain
Don’t
do not use heat packs and avoid hot baths
do not drink alcohol
do not massage your knee
do not carry anything heavy
do not completely stop moving your knee – after a few days of resting, try to do some gentle movements
A pharmacist can help with a meniscus tear
You can ask a pharmacist about painkillers and the types of knee supports you can get.
Find a pharmacy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
knee pain is stopping you doing normal activities or affecting your sleep
the pain is getting worse or keeps coming back
your symptoms have not improved after treating it at home
your knee is stiff for more than 30 minutes after waking up

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have very bad knee pain after a fall or injury
you're unable to walk or put weight on your knee
the skin around your knee is swollen and feels hot
you have knee pain and feel generally unwell with a high temperature or feeling hot and shivery
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.

Immediate action required:
Go to A&E if:
your knee has moved out of place, changed shape or is pointing at an odd angle
you heard a crack when you had your injury
you have any tingling or you have no feeling in your knee, leg or toes
Call 999 for an ambulance if you cannot get to A&E.
Find your nearest A&E

Treatments for a meniscus tear
A meniscus tear can get better on its own without treatment, but it can take a while to heal.
Sometimes,
physiotherapy
may be recommended to help reduce pain and improve movement and strength in the knee.
If the damage is severe, you may need
arthroscopy
surgery to repair or remove the damaged cartilage.

Help us improve our website
Can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey

