Necrotising fasciitis, also known as the "flesh-eating disease", is a rare and life-threatening infection that can happen if a wound gets infected. It needs to be treated in hospital straight away.

Check if you have necrotising fasciitis
Symptoms of necrotising fasciitis can develop quickly within hours or over a few days.
At first you may have:
intense pain or loss of feeling near to a cut or wound – the pain may seem much worse than you would usually expect from a cut or wound
swelling of the skin around the affected area
flu-like symptoms, such as a high temperature, headache and tiredness
Later symptoms can include:
being sick (vomiting) and diarrhoea
confusion
black, purple or grey blotches and blisters on the skin (these may be less obvious on black or brown skin)
Information:
Necrotising fasciitis is very rare. The symptoms are similar to more common skin infections like
cellulitis
.

Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
you have a cut or wound that is much more painful than you would expect
you have a cut or wound and get symptoms like a high temperature, headache, tiredness and muscle aches
you have sudden confusion
you have black, purple or grey blotches or blisters near a cut or wound
Find your nearest A&E

Important:
Help from NHS 111
If you are not sure what to do, call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.
NHS 111 can tell you the right place to get help.

Treatments for necrotising fasciitis
Necrotising fasciitis gets worse quickly and can be fatal. It must be treated in hospital as soon as possible.
Treatment will usually include:
antibiotics
surgery to remove the affected area
Even after successful treatment, there may be long-term changes in how your body looks and how you move or use the affected part of your body. Sometimes
amputation
of affected limbs is needed.
You may need further surgery and
physiotherapy
to help you recover.

Causes of necrotising fasciitis
Necrotising fasciitis is an infection that can happen after getting a wound. It causes damage to the deep layers of your skin.
The infection may get into the body through:
cuts and scratches
burns and scalds
insect bites
surgery
injecting drugs
You may be more at risk from developing necrotising fasciitis if you have
diabetes
or a weakened immune system.

