Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are medicines that are widely used to relieve pain, reduce inflammation, and bring down a high temperature.
They're often used to relieve symptoms of:
headaches
painful periods
sprains and strains
colds
and
flu
coronavirus (COVID-19)
conditions such as
arthritis
that can cause long-term pain
Although NSAIDs are commonly used, they're not suitable for everyone and can sometimes cause side effects.
This information is a general overview of NSAIDs.
For information about a specific medicine, you can
look up your medicine
in the Medicines A to Z.

Types of NSAIDs
NSAIDs are available as tablets, capsules, suppositories (capsules inserted into the bottom), creams, gels and injections.
Some can be bought over the counter from pharmacies, while others need a prescription.
The main types of NSAIDs include:
ibuprofen
naproxen
diclofenac
celecoxib
mefenamic acid
etoricoxib
indomethacin
aspirin for pain relief
(low-dose aspirin is not normally considered to be an NSAID)
NSAIDs may be sold or prescribed under these names or a brand name.
They're all similarly effective, although you may find a particular one works best for you.

Who can take NSAIDs
Most people can take NSAIDs, but some people need to be careful about taking them.
It's a good idea to ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice before taking an NSAID if you:
are over 65 years of age
are pregnant or trying for a baby
are breastfeeding
have
asthma
have had an
allergic reaction
to NSAIDs in the past
have had
stomach ulcers
in the past
have any problems with your heart, liver, kidneys, blood pressure, circulation or bowels
are taking other medicines
are looking for medicine for a child under 16 (do not give any medicine that contains aspirin to children under 16)
NSAIDs might not necessarily need to be avoided in these cases, but they should only be used on the advice of a healthcare professional as there may be a higher risk of side effects.
If NSAIDs are not suitable, your pharmacist or doctor may suggest alternatives to NSAIDs, such as
paracetamol
.

Side effects of NSAIDs
Like all medicines, there's a risk of side effects from NSAIDs.
These tend to be more common if you're taking high doses for a long time, or you're elderly or in poor general health.
Over-the-counter NSAIDs generally have fewer side effects than stronger prescription medicines.
Possible side effects of NSAIDs include:
indigestion
– including
stomach aches
, feeling sick and
diarrhoea
stomach ulcers
– these can cause internal bleeding and
anaemia
; extra medicine to protect your stomach may be prescribed to help reduce this risk
headaches
drowsiness
dizziness
allergic reactions
in rare cases, problems with your liver, kidneys or heart and circulation, such as
heart failure
,
heart attacks
and
strokes
If you're bothered by side effects, stop taking your medicine and tell your doctor.

Interactions with other medicines
Some NSAIDs can react unpredictably with other medicines.
This can affect how well either medicine works and increase the risk of side effects.
It's particularly important to get medical advice before taking an NSAID if you're already taking:
another NSAID
low-dose aspirin
or
warfarin
– medicines used to prevent
blood clots
ciclosporin – a medicine used to treat autoimmune conditions, such as
arthritis
or
ulcerative colitis
diuretics – medicines sometimes used to treat
high blood pressure
lithium – a medicine used to treat mental health problems, including
bipolar disorder
and severe
depression
methotrexate – a medicine used to treat inflammatory conditions such as
rheumatoid arthritis
a type of
antidepressant medicine
called a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)
– examples of SSRIs are
citalopram
and
fluoxetine (Prozac)
If you're not sure whether a medicine you're taking is safe to take at the same time as an NSAID, check the leaflet that comes with it, or ask a pharmacist or doctor for advice.

Food and alcohol
The leaflet that comes with your medicine should say whether you need to avoid any particular foods or drinks. Ask your pharmacist or doctor if you're not sure.
For information about a specific medicine, check the
product information about medicines on the GOV.UK website
.
Generally, you do not need to avoid any specific foods while taking NSAIDs.
Tablets or capsules should normally be swallowed whole, without chewing, and taken with water or food to stop them upsetting your stomach.
It's usually safe to drink alcohol while taking NSAIDs, but drinking alcohol excessively may irritate your stomach.

Overdoses of NSAIDs
Taking too much of an NSAID can be dangerous. This is known as taking an overdose.
Contact your GP or
NHS 111
for advice immediately if you take too much of your medicine.
Call 999 for an ambulance immediately if you or someone else experiences serious effects of an overdose, such as fits (seizures), breathing difficulties, or loss of consciousness.

Alternatives to NSAIDs
As NSAIDs can cause troublesome side effects, alternatives are often recommended first.
The main alternative for pain relief is
paracetamol
, which is available over the counter and is safe for most people to take.
NSAID creams and gels that you rub into your skin may be worth trying first if you have muscle or
joint pain
in a particular part of your body, as they tend to have fewer side effects than tablets or capsules.
Your doctor may also be able to recommend different medicines and therapies depending on the health problem you have.
For example,
physiotherapy
may help some people with muscle or joint pain.

