Oral thrush is usually harmless. It's common in babies and older people with dentures. It can be easily treated with medicines bought from a pharmacy.

Check if it's oral thrush
Adults
When you have oral thrush, your mouth is red inside with white patches.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/459245/view
When you wipe off the white patches, they leave red spots that can bleed.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/633814/view
Other symptoms in adults are:
cracks at the corners of the mouth
not tasting things properly
an unpleasant taste in the mouth
pain inside the mouth (for example, a sore tongue or sore gums)
difficulty eating and drinking
Oral thrush in adults is not contagious.
Babies
A baby with oral thrush will have a white coating on their tongue. It may look like cottage cheese and it cannot be rubbed off easily.
Credit:
DR M.A. ANSARY/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/251590/view
Sometimes there are white spots in their mouth.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/252476/view
Babies with oral thrush may not want to feed.
Babies can pass oral thrush on through breastfeeding. This can cause
nipple thrush in mothers
.

If you're not sure it's oral thrush
Look at other causes of a
white or sore tongue
.

A pharmacist can help with oral thrush
Oral thrush can be easily treated with a mouth gel bought from a pharmacy. The gel is suitable for adults, children and babies over the age of 4 months.
Ask your pharmacist for advice. Always follow the instructions on the medicine packet.
If you leave oral thrush untreated, the infection can spread to other parts of the body.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
your baby is under 4 months and has signs of oral thrush
you have oral thrush and do not see any improvement after 1 week of treatment with a mouth gel
you have difficulty or pain when swallowing

How you can prevent oral thrush
Oral thrush is an infection caused by a fungus called Candida. Some things can make the fungus grow more than usual.
You might get thrush if you're:
taking antibiotics over a long time
using asthma inhalers
having cancer treatment like chemotherapy
There are some things you can do to help prevent oral thrush.
Do
take care of your teeth: brush twice a day, clean your dentures, and go for regular check-ups even if you have dentures
brush your gums and tongue with a soft toothbrush if you do not have any teeth
rinse your mouth after eating or taking medicine
go to regular check-ups if you have a long-term condition like diabetes
sterilise dummies regularly
sterilise bottles after each use
Don’t
do not wear dentures at night
do not keep wearing dentures if they do not fit properly – see your dentist
do not smoke

