Pain in the bottom of your foot (arch, ball or sole) will often get better in a few weeks. See a GP if it does not improve.

How you can ease pain in the bottom of the foot
If you see a GP about pain in the bottom of your foot, they may suggest trying these things:
Do
rest and raise your foot when you can
put an ice pack (or bag of frozen peas in a towel) on the painful area for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
wear shoes with plenty of room for your feet that have a low heel and soft sole
use soft insoles or pads you put in your shoes
try to lose weight if you're overweight
try regular gentle stretching exercises for your foot and ankle
use painkillers such as
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen gel
(or ibuprofen tablets if needed)
Don’t
do not do any sports or other activity that you think is causing the pain
do not walk or stand for long periods
do not wear high heels or tight pointy shoes
A pharmacist can help with foot pain
You can ask a pharmacist about:
the best painkiller to take
insoles and pads for your shoes
treatments for common skin problems, such as hard skin or a verruca
if you need to see a GP
Find a pharmacy

Video: exercises to reduce pain in the bottom of the foot
This video shows exercises that can help with pain in the bottom of the foot.
Media last reviewed: 17 April 2022
Media review due: 17 April 2025
See exercise video safety information
The exercises in this series of videos are suitable for most people in good health with a reasonable level of fitness.
Unless stated otherwise, they are general exercises only and are not aimed at treating any specific cause of pain or condition. Video titles and descriptions can give more information on how difficult the exercises are and who they are for.
Get advice from a healthcare professional before trying them if:
you are not sure if the exercises are suitable for your current level of fitness
you have a health problem, an injury, any symptoms, are feeling unwell, or you have had a recent health event such as a heart attack or operation
you have any other concerns about your health
you are pregnant or have recently given birth
Stop the exercise immediately if you feel any pain or become unwell. If you are concerned about any symptoms, or they do not go away,
get help from 111 online
or call 111 for advice.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
the pain in the bottom of your foot is stopping you doing normal activities
the pain is getting worse or keeps coming back
the pain has not improved after treating it at home for 2 weeks
you have any tingling or loss of sensation in your foot
you have diabetes and foot pain – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes

Immediate action required:
Go to an urgent treatment centre or A&E if:
you have severe pain in the bottom of your foot
you're not able to walk
your foot has changed shape or is at an odd angle
you heard a snap, grinding or popping noise at the time of injury
you feel faint, dizzy or sick from the pain
These might be signs of a broken bone after an injury.
Find an urgent treatment centre
What we mean by severe pain
Severe pain:
always there and so bad it's hard to think or talk
you cannot sleep
it's very hard to move, get out of bed, go to the bathroom, wash or dress
Moderate pain:
always there
makes it hard to concentrate or sleep
you can manage to get up, wash or dress
Mild pain:
comes and goes
is annoying but does not stop you doing daily activities

Common causes of pain in the bottom of the foot
Pain in the bottom of your foot is often caused by exercise, such as running, wearing shoes that are too tight or a condition, such as Morton's neuroma.
Some people also have a foot shape that puts extra pressure on the bottom of the foot. Hard or cracked skin or a verruca can also cause this type of pain.
Your symptoms might give you an idea what's causing it, but do not self-diagnose. Get medical help if you're worried.
Some of the possible causes of pain in the bottom of the foot with their associated symptoms.
Symptoms
Possible cause
Pain, swelling, bruising, started after intense or repetitive exercise
Sprained foot
Sharp, burning or shooting pain near your toes (ball of your foot), feels like a lump or small stone under your foot
Morton's neuroma
Sharp pain between your arch and heel, feels worse when you start walking and better when resting, difficulty raising toes off floor
Plantar fasciitis
No gap (arch) under your foot when you stand up, your foot presses flat on the floor
Flat feet (fallen arches)

Information:
Do not worry if you're not sure what the problem is.
Follow the advice on this page and see a GP if the pain does not get better in 2 weeks.

