Acute pancreatitis is a condition where the pancreas becomes inflamed (swollen) over a short period of time.
The pancreas is a small organ, located behind the stomach, that helps with digestion.
Most people with acute pancreatitis start to feel better within about a week and have no further problems. But some people with severe acute pancreatitis can go on to develop serious complications.
Acute pancreatitis is different to
chronic pancreatitis
, where the pancreas has become permanently damaged from inflammation over many years.

Symptoms of acute pancreatitis
The most common symptoms of acute pancreatitis include:
suddenly getting severe pain in the centre of your tummy (abdomen)
feeling or being sick
a high temperature of 38C or more (fever)
Read more about the
symptoms of acute pancreatitis
and
diagnosing acute pancreatitis
.

When to get medical help
See a GP immediately if you suddenly develop severe abdominal pain. If this isn't possible, contact
NHS 111
for advice.

Causes of acute pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis is most often linked to:
gallstones
drinking too much alcohol
But sometimes the cause is not known.
By reducing how much alcohol you drink and altering your diet to make gallstones less likely, you can reduce your chances of developing acute pancreatitis.
Read more about the
causes of acute pancreatitis
and
preventing acute pancreatitis
.

How it's treated
Treatment for acute pancreatitis aims to help control the condition and manage any symptoms.
This usually involves admission to hospital. You may be given fluids directly into a vein (intravenous fluids), pain relief, liquid food through a tube in your tummy and oxygen through tubes in your nose.
Most people with acute pancreatitis get better within a week and are well enough to leave hospital after a few days.
Recovery can take longer in severe cases, as some people can develop complications.
Read more about
treating acute pancreatitis
and the possible
complications of acute pancreatitis
.

Help us improve our website
Can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey

