Piles (haemorrhoids) are lumps inside and around your bottom (anus). They often get better on their own after a few days. There are things you can do to treat and prevent piles.

Check if it's piles
Symptoms of piles include:
bright red blood after you poo
an
itchy anus
feeling like you still need to poo after going to the toilet
mucus in your underwear or on toilet paper after wiping your bottom
lumps around your anus
pain around your anus

See what piles look like
They can be small lumps, around the size of a pea.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/575741/view
They can be pink or purple.
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/600596/view
They can grow into larger lumps, the size of grapes.
Credit:
Hercules Robinson / Alamy Stock Photo https://www.alamy.com/mediacomp/imagedetails.aspx?ref=ABFA1G

How you can treat or prevent piles
Do
drink lots of fluid and eat plenty of
fibre
to keep your poo soft
wipe your bottom with damp toilet paper
take
paracetamol
if piles hurt
take a warm bath to ease itching and pain
use an ice pack wrapped in a towel to ease discomfort
gently push a pile back inside
keep your bottom clean and dry
exercise regularly
cut down on alcohol and caffeine (like tea, coffee and cola) to avoid constipation
Don’t
do not wipe your bottom too hard after you poo
do not ignore the urge to poo
do not push too hard when pooing
do not take painkillers that contain
codeine
, as they can cause constipation
do not take
ibuprofen
if your piles are bleeding
do not spend more time than you need to on the toilet
Ask a pharmacist about treatment for piles
A pharmacist can suggest:
creams to ease the pain, itching and swelling
treatment to help constipation and soften poo
cold packs to ease discomfort
Many pharmacies have private areas if you do not want to be overheard.
Find a pharmacy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have symptoms of piles and they're getting worse or there's no improvement after 7 days of treatment at home
you keep getting piles
you notice a change around your anus that is not normal for you
The GP may prescribe stronger medicines for piles or constipation. They may also check your symptoms are not being caused by something else.

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have piles and your temperature is very high or you feel hot and shivery and generally unwell
you have pus leaking from your piles
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.

Hospital treatment for piles
If there's no improvement to your piles after home treatments, you may need hospital treatment.
Talk to your doctor about the best treatment for you. Treatment does not always prevent piles coming back.
Treatment without surgery
Common hospital treatments include:
rubber band ligation: a band is placed around your piles to make them drop off
sclerotherapy: a liquid is injected into your piles to make them shrink
electrotherapy: a gentle electric current is applied to your piles to make them shrink
infrared coagulation: an infrared light is used to cut the blood supply to your piles to make them shrink
You'll be awake for this type of treatment, but the area will be numbed.
You should be able to go home on the same day.
If these treatments do not work, you may need surgery to remove your piles.
Surgery
Surgical treatments include:
haemorrhoidectomy: your piles are cut out
stapled haemorrhoidopexy: your piles are stapled back inside your anus
haemorrhoidal artery ligation: stitches are used to cut the blood supply to your piles to make them shrink
You'll usually need to be asleep for this type of treatment and may need to stay in hospital for more than 1 day.

Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or call 999 if you have piles and:
you're bleeding non-stop
there's a lot of blood – for example, the toilet water turns red or you see large blood clots
you're in severe pain
What we mean by severe pain
Severe pain:
always there and so bad it's hard to think or talk
you cannot sleep
it's very hard to move, get out of bed, go to the bathroom, wash or dress
Moderate pain:
always there
makes it hard to concentrate or sleep
you can manage to get up, wash or dress
Mild pain:
comes and goes
is annoying but does not stop you doing daily activities

What causes piles?
Piles are swollen blood vessels. It's not clear what causes them.
Things that make piles more likely:
constipation
pushing too hard when pooing
heavy lifting
pregnancy

Find out more about piles during pregnancy

