Pneumonia is inflammation of the lungs, usually caused by an infection. Most people get better in 2 to 4 weeks, but babies, older people, and people with heart or lung conditions are at risk of getting seriously ill and may need treatment in hospital.

Check if you have pneumonia
Symptoms of pneumonia can start suddenly or gradually over a few days.
They include:
a cough – you may cough up yellow or green mucus (phlegm)
shortness of breath
a high temperature
chest pain
an aching body
feeling very tired
loss of appetite
making wheezing noises when you breathe – babies may also make grunting noises
feeling confused – this is common in older people

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you've had a cough for 3 weeks or more
you're coughing up blood
you have chest pain that comes and goes, or happens when breathing or coughing
you're feeling short of breath
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.

Immediate action required:
Call 999 if:
you're struggling to breathe – you're choking, gasping and unable to speak
you have pale, blue or blotchy skin, lips or tongue
you suddenly feel confused – for example, you do not know where you are
you cannot wake your baby and they feel floppy

Treatment for pneumonia
You'll usually be given antibiotics to treat pneumonia. Most people get better in 2 to 4 weeks.
Some people are more at risk of becoming seriously ill. You may need to go to hospital for treatment if:
you're over 65
you have
cardiovascular disease
or a long-term lung condition
your baby or young child has pneumonia
you're very unwell
In hospital you'll usually be given fluids and antibiotics to treat the infection. You may also be given oxygen to help you breathe.
You may be sent for an
X-ray
of your chest and blood tests to check for other conditions.
Important
If you're given antibiotics to take at home, contact your doctor if you do not feel better after taking them for 2 to 3 days.

Things you can do if you have pneumonia
There are some things you can do to help with recovery from pneumonia and reduce the risk of spreading it to other people.
Do
rest until you feel better – try to stay at home and avoid contact with other people if you have a high temperature or do not feel well enough to do normal activities
drink plenty of fluids
take
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
to help with pain or a high temperature
cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or sneeze
put used tissues in the bin as quickly as possible
wash your hands regularly with water and soap
Don’t
do not take cough medicine – coughing helps your body get rid of the infection
do not smoke

Causes of pneumonia
Pneumonia is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection.
You can catch it from someone who has it, or you can sometimes get it if you have another infection such as
flu
or
coronavirus (COVID-19)
.
It can be caused by a fungal infection but this is rare in healthy people in the UK.
It may also be caused by something getting into your lungs, such as water or food (aspiration pneumonia).

Pneumonia vaccination
If you're at risk of getting seriously ill with pneumonia, it's recommended you get the
pneumococcal vaccine
, also known as the pneumonia vaccine. It protects against an infection that can cause pneumonia.
People at high risk include:
babies
adults aged over 65
people with heart, lung, liver, kidney or neurological conditions with a risk of aspiration
people with diabetes
people with a weakened immune system, for example, you have a condition that stops your immune system working properly, or you are having treatment to suppress your immune system
Adults and children more at risk should also get a
flu vaccine
every year.
You can ask a GP or pharmacist about both vaccines.
Information:
Stopping smoking also reduces your chance of getting pneumonia.

