A pulmonary embolism is when a blood clot blocks a blood vessel in your lungs. It can be life-threatening if not treated quickly.

Check if you have a pulmonary embolism
Symptoms of a pulmonary embolism include:
difficulty breathing that comes on suddenly
chest pain that's worse when you breathe in
coughing up blood
You may also have pain, redness and swelling in one of your legs (usually the calf). These are symptoms of a blood clot, also called
DVT (deep vein thrombosis)
.

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have difficulty breathing which comes on suddenly
you're coughing up blood
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.

Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe difficulty breathing
you feel pain in your chest or upper back
your heart is beating very fast
someone has passed out
These could be signs of a pulmonary embolism or another serious condition.
Find your nearest A&E

Treating a pulmonary embolism
If a GP thinks you've got a pulmonary embolism, you'll be sent to hospital for further tests and treatment.
At hospital, you'll probably be given an injection of
anticoagulant medicine
before you get any test results.
Anticoagulants stop blood clots getting bigger and prevent new clots forming.
If tests confirm you have a pulmonary embolism, you'll continue with anticoagulant injections for at least 5 days.
You'll also need to take anticoagulant tablets for at least 3 months.
You should make a full recovery from a pulmonary embolism if it's spotted and treated early.

Reduce your pulmonary embolism risk
A pulmonary embolism often happens when part of the blood clot dislodges itself from your leg and travels up to your lungs, causing a blockage.
There are measures you can take to lower your risk of getting a pulmonary embolism.
If you're being treated in hospital for another condition, your medical team should take steps to prevent
DVT (deep vein thrombosis)
.
A DVT can occasionally develop on long journeys such as bus, train or air travel. The risk of developing DVT is increased for flights lasting more than 4 hours.
There are things you can do to reduce your risk of getting a travel-related DVT.
Do
sit comfortably in your seat and choose an aisle seat if possible
wear loose-fitting clothing
make sure you have plenty of leg room
drink water regularly
take regular breaks from sitting
bend and straighten your legs, feet and toes every 30 minutes while seated
press the balls of your feet down hard against the floor every so often
wear flight socks
Don’t
do not sit for long periods without moving
do not drink alcohol
do not drink too much coffee and other caffeine-based drinks
do not take sleeping pills

