Respiratory tract infections (RTIs) are infections of parts of the body involved in breathing, such as the sinuses, throat, airways or lungs. Most RTIs get better without treatment, but sometimes you may need to see a GP.

Check if you have an RTI
Symptoms of an RTI include:
a cough – you may bring up mucus (phlegm)
sneezing
a stuffy or runny nose
a
sore throat
headaches
muscle aches
breathlessness, tight chest or wheezing
a high temperature
feeling generally unwell

Things you can do yourself
Most RTIs pass within 1 to 2 weeks. You can usually treat your symptoms at home.

Do
get plenty of rest
drink lots of water to loosen any mucus and make it easier to cough up
drink a hot lemon and honey drink to help soothe a cough (not suitable for babies under 1 year old)
gargle with warm salty water if you have a sore throat (children should not try this)
raise your head up while sleeping using extra pillows to make breathing easier and clear your chest of mucus
use painkillers to bring down a fever and help ease a sore throat, headaches and muscle pain
Don’t
do not let children breathe in steam from a bowl of hot water as there's a risk of scalding
do not give aspirin to children under 16
do not smoke – it can make your symptoms worse

How to make a hot lemon and honey drink
Squeeze half a lemon into a mug of boiled water
Add 1 to 2 teaspoons of honey
Drink while still warm
Do not give hot drinks to small children.

How to gargle with salt water
Dissolve half a teaspoon of salt in a glass of warm water – warm water helps salt dissolve
Gargle with the solution then spit it out – do not swallow it
Repeat as often as you like

A pharmacist can help with an RTI
A pharmacist can suggest treatments to help relieve your symptoms, such as
decongestants
and nasal sprays.
You can also buy cough medicines and throat lozenges, although there's little evidence to show they help.
Some treatments contain
paracetamol
and
ibuprofen
.
If you're taking these medicines separately, be careful not to take more than the recommended dose.
Certain treatments are not suitable for children, babies and pregnant women. Your pharmacist can advise you about the best treatment for you or your child.

Find a pharmacy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you feel very unwell or your symptoms get worse
you cough up blood or bloodstained mucus
you have had a cough for more than 3 weeks
you're pregnant
you're over 65
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because you have a condition like
diabetes
or you're having
chemotherapy
you have a long-term health condition, such as a heart, lung or kidney condition
You may have
pneumonia
if your symptoms are severe.

Treatment from a GP
Treatment will depend on the cause of your RTI:
a virus
(like
colds
) – this usually clears up by itself after a few weeks and antibiotics will not help
bacteria
(like
pneumonia
) – a GP may prescribe
antibiotics
(make sure you complete the whole course as advised by a GP, even if you start to feel better)
Sometimes a sample of your mucus may need to be tested to see what's causing your RTI.

Important:
Use of antibiotics
Antibiotics are only used to treat bacterial infections. They're not used for treating viral infections because they do not work for this type of infection.

How to avoid passing RTIs on to others:
cover your mouth when you cough or sneeze
wash your hands regularly
throw away used tissues immediately
How to avoid getting an RTI
If you keep getting RTIs or you're at a high risk of getting one (for example, because you're over the age of 65 or have a serious long-term health condition), you should:
ask a GP about the annual
flu vaccination
–
find out if you're eligible for the free flu vaccine
ask if you should have the
pneumococcal vaccine
– this helps prevent pneumonia
stop smoking if you smoke
drink less alcohol
Causes and types of RTIs
RTIs are often spread in the coughs and sneezes of someone with an infection.
There are several different types. They're usually grouped into upper and lower RTIs.
Difference between upper RTIs and lower RTIs
Upper RTIs (sinuses and throat)
Lower RTIs (airways and lungs)
Common cold
Bronchitis
Sinusitis
(sinus infection)
Bronchiolitis
Tonsillitis
Chest infection
Laryngitis
Pneumonia
(lung infection)
Flu
can be an upper or lower RTI.
Lower RTIs tend to last longer and can be more serious.

