Retinal migraines are a type of migraine that affect the eyes. They can cause temporary vision loss in 1 eye and other eye symptoms.
Retinal migraines are less common than
other types of migraine
.

Check if it's a retinal migraine
Retinal migraines usually affect 1 eye.
They often come on suddenly and symptoms include:
vision loss – this usually lasts around 10 to 20 minutes but can sometimes last up to 1 hour
a blind spot in your vision
a headache – you may get this at the same time as the eye symptoms or shortly afterwards
other eye symptoms, such as blurred vision and seeing flashing lights, zigzag patterns or coloured spots or lines
feeling sick or being sick
Sometimes you can get the eye symptoms without having a headache.

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have vision problems, such as a blind spot in your vision, for the first time
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
You have retinal migraines and:
they're getting worse
you're getting them more often
there's a change to your usual symptoms

Immediate action required:
Call 999 if:
you have a headache that came on suddenly and is extremely painful
you suddenly have problems speaking or remembering things
you have sudden vision loss, blurred vision or double vision
you suddenly feel dizzy, drowsy or confused
you have a seizure or fit
you have a high temperature with a stiff neck, pain when looking at bright lights, pale and blotchy skin or a rash that does not fade when you roll a glass over it
you have sudden weakness in your arms or legs on 1 side of your body, or 1 side of your face
These are signs of more serious conditions and you need to get immediate medical help.

Treatments for retinal migraine
Treatment for retinal migraines is not usually needed if you do not have them very often.
If you have them frequently, a GP may suggest:
trying to avoid things that cause your migraines, such as cutting down on caffeine or alcohol
painkillers like
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
medicines to stop you feeling sick or being sick
medicines to help prevent migraines, such as
topiramate
or
amitriptyline
a few weeks of
acupuncture
If these treatments do not help control your migraines, you may be referred to a specialist called a neurologist for more tests and treatment.

Causes of retinal migraine
Retinal migraines are thought to happen when the blood vessels in your eye suddenly narrow, restricting the blood flow.
Things that can cause them include:
stress
caffeine and alcohol
dehydration
smoking
high blood pressure
bending over
low blood sugar
some types of hormonal contraception
Keeping a record of when you get migraines in a diary can help you work out what might be causing them.

Things you can do if you get retinal migraines
There are things you can do if you get retinal migraines. A GP may suggest trying them before recommending other treatments.
Do
try sleeping or lying down in a dark room during a migraine
drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration
have a healthy diet and eat meals at regular times
exercise regularly and get plenty of sleep
try to keep to a healthy weight
try to manage your stress levels
avoid things you know can trigger migraines like caffeine and alcohol

