Scoliosis is where the spine twists and curves to the side.
It can affect people of any age, from babies to adults, but most often starts in children aged 10 to 15.
Scoliosis can improve with treatment, but it is not usually a sign of anything serious and treatment is not always needed if it's mild.

Symptoms of scoliosis
Credit:
MID ESSEX HOSPITAL SERVICES NHS TRUST/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/676525/view, https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/676524/view
Signs of scoliosis include:
a visibly curved spine
leaning to 1 side
uneven shoulders
1 shoulder or hip sticking out
the ribs sticking out on 1 side
clothes not fitting well
Some people with scoliosis may also have
back pain
. This is usually more common in adults with the condition.

When to see a GP
See a GP if you think you or your child has scoliosis. It's unlikely that there's anything seriously wrong, but it's best to get it checked out.
If the GP suspects scoliosis they should refer you to a specialist scoliosis centre. If you're diagnosed with scoliosis, they will discuss treatment options with you.
An
X-ray
of your back will be carried out to check how big the curve is.
You can
find a specialist scoliosis centre on the Scoliosis Association UK website
.

Treatments for scoliosis
Treatment for scoliosis depends on your age, how severe the curve is, and whether it's likely to get worse with time.
Many people will not need any treatment and only a small number will need to have surgery on their spine.
Babies and toddlers may not need treatment as the curve might improve over time. A plaster cast or plastic brace may be fitted to their back to stop the curve getting worse as they grow.
Older children may wear a back brace to stop the curve getting worse until they stop growing. Sometimes surgery may be needed to control the growth of the spine until an operation to straighten it can be done when they stop growing.
Adults may need treatment to relieve pain, such as painkillers, spinal injections and, very occasionally, surgery.
It's not clear whether back exercises help improve scoliosis, but general
exercise
is good for overall health and should not be avoided unless advised by your doctor.
Read more about
treatments for scoliosis in children
and
treatments for scoliosis in adults
.

Living with scoliosis
Most people with scoliosis are able to live normal lives and can do most activities, including exercise and sports.
The condition does not usually cause significant pain or any other health problems, and tends to stay the same after you stop growing – see a GP if it gets any worse.
Having scoliosis or wearing a back brace can be tough and may cause problems with body image and self-esteem, particularly for children and teenagers.
You may find it useful to contact a support group, such as
Scoliosis Association UK
.
These groups are a good source of information and support, and they may be able to put you in touch with people in a similar situation to you.

Causes of scoliosis
In around 8 in every 10 cases, the cause of scoliosis is unknown. This is called idiopathic scoliosis.
Idiopathic scoliosis cannot be prevented and is not thought to be linked to things such as bad posture, exercise or diet.
Your genes may make you more likely to get it though, as it sometimes runs in families.
Less commonly, scoliosis may be caused by:
the bones in the spine not forming properly in the womb – this is called congenital scoliosis and is present from birth
an underlying nerve or muscle condition, such as
cerebral palsy
or
muscular dystrophy
– this is called neuromuscular scoliosis
wear and tear of the spine with age – this is called degenerative scoliosis, which affects older adults
Scoliosis Association UK
has more information about the different types of scoliosis.

Help us improve our website
Can you answer some questions about your visit today?
Take our survey

