Scurvy (severe vitamin C deficiency) is rare as most people get enough vitamin C in their diet. It's usually easy to treat.

Causes of scurvy
Scurvy is caused by not having enough vitamin C in your diet over a long period of time. Vitamin C is mainly found in fruit and vegetables.
However, even people who do not eat very healthily all the time are not usually considered at risk of scurvy.
Things that increase your risk of scurvy
Although scurvy is rare, you may be more at risk if you:
have no fresh fruits or vegetables in your diet for a while
eat very little food at all – possible reasons include treatments that make you feel very sick all the time (such as chemotherapy) or an
eating disorder
such as
anorexia
smoke, as smoking reduces how much vitamin C your body gets from food
have a long-term dependency on drugs or alcohol that affects your diet
have a poor diet while pregnant or breastfeeding, because the body needs more vitamin C at these times
Babies, children and older people who find it hard to have a healthy diet may also be more at risk of scurvy.

Symptoms of scurvy
Symptoms of scurvy may include:
feeling very tired and weak all the time
feeling irritable and sad all the time
joint, muscle or leg pain
swollen, bleeding gums (sometimes teeth can fall out)
developing red or blue spots on the skin, usually on the legs and feet, although this may be less noticeable on brown or black skin
skin that bruises easily

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
You or your child are at risk of scurvy and:
feel very tired and weak all the time
feel irritable and sad all the time
have joint, muscle or leg pain
have wounds that reopen or are not healing well

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 now if:
You or your child are at risk of scurvy and have:
skin that bruises easily
swollen, bleeding gums (sometimes teeth can fall out)
joint or leg swelling
a high temperature (fever) or feel hot or shivery
yellow whites of the eyes, or yellow skin although this may be less obvious on brown or black skin – this can be a sign of jaundice
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.

Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
You or your child have:
a rash that does not fade when you press a glass against it – in scurvy, this may look like red or blue spots
a sudden, severe headache unlike anything you've experienced before, even if it's got a bit better now – it may have felt like you had been hit with something hard
a stiff neck
sensitivity to light
blurred or double vision
stroke-like symptoms – such as slurred speech and weakness on one side of the body
loss of consciousness or uncontrollable shaking (convulsions)
severe chest pain or difficulty breathing
confusion or drowsiness
Your child may appear limp, floppy or not respond like they normally do. Their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face.
Find your nearest A&E

Treating scurvy
It's important that scurvy is treated quickly. Without treatment, scurvy can cause serious problems and may even be life-threatening.
Mild cases of scurvy are often easily treated by adding some vitamin C to your diet, such as from fresh fruit and vegetables.
A GP may also recommend taking vitamin C supplements (also called ascorbic acid) until you feel better.
Most people treated for scurvy feel better within days and go on to make a full recovery.
The GP may refer you to a specialist for treatment, support or advice. This depends on what's causing your scurvy.

How to prevent a vitamin C deficiency
The best sources of
vitamin C
are fruit and vegetables.
The best way to prevent a vitamin C deficiency and get enough
vitamins and minerals
is to eat a
healthy, balanced diet
.
It's important to speak to a GP or midwife before taking any supplements or making changes to your diet during pregnancy or while breastfeeding.

