You can usually do things to ease shoulder pain yourself. See a GP if it does not start feeling better after 2 weeks.

How to ease shoulder pain yourself
You usually need to do these things for 2 weeks before shoulder pain starts to ease.
It can take 6 months or longer to recover from shoulder pain.
Do
stay active and gently move your shoulder
try shoulder exercises for 6 to 8 weeks to stop pain returning
stand up straight with your shoulders down and gently back
sit with a cushion behind your lower back
rest your arm on a cushion in your lap
use pain relief so you can keep moving – try painkillers like
paracetamol
and
ibuprofen
, and heat or cold packs
Putting heat or cold packs on your shoulder
Try either a:
pack of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel for up to 20 minutes, 3 times a day
hot water bottle wrapped in a tea towel for up to 20 minutes, 2 to 3 times a day
Don’t
do not completely stop using your shoulder – this can stop it getting better
do not do things that seem to make it worse
do not make up your own strenuous exercises or use heavy gym equipment
do not slouch when sitting – do not roll your shoulders or bring your neck forward
A pharmacist can help with shoulder pain
A pharmacist may suggest:
the best painkiller – this might be tablets, or a cream or gel you rub on your skin
other ideas for pain relief and things you can buy to help, like heat and cold packs
seeing a GP if you need to
Find a pharmacy

Information:
Video exercises for shoulder pain
Watch video exercises for shoulder pain from the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
shoulder pain is getting worse or does not improve after 2 weeks
it's very difficult to move your arm or shoulder

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have sudden or very bad shoulder pain
you cannot move your arm
your arm or shoulder has changed shape or is badly swollen
you have pins and needles that do not go away
there's no feeling in your arm or shoulder
your arm or shoulder is hot or cold to touch
the pain started after an injury or accident, like a fall
you develop severe pain in both shoulders
you feel feverish or unwell
These can be signs of something serious, like a broken or dislocated bone, or a torn (ruptured) ligament or tendon.
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.
You could also go to
your nearest urgent treatment centre
.

Treatment from a GP
A GP will examine you to work out what's causing your shoulder pain.
They might send you for tests (such as an X-ray) to check the cause.
They'll suggest a treatment based on the cause, for example:
stronger medicine or injections to ease pain and swelling
physiotherapy or exercises to do at home
things to avoid to stop the pain getting worse or returning
seeing a specialist for tests or treatment
Physiotherapy for shoulder pain
The number of physiotherapy sessions you may have depends on the cause of your shoulder pain.
If you're still in pain after your sessions end, go back to the GP. They might prescribe more physiotherapy or suggest another treatment.
Physiotherapy is available through the NHS, but waiting times can be long. You can also pay to get physiotherapy privately.
Find a physiotherapist on the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy website

Causes of shoulder pain
Shoulder pain that does not improve after 2 weeks might be caused by something that needs treatment.
But do not self-diagnose. See a GP if you're worried.
Symptoms and possible causes of shoulder pain
Shoulder symptoms
Possible causes
Shoulder symptoms
Pain and stiffness that does not go away over months or years
Possible causes
Frozen shoulder
, arthritis (
osteoarthritis
or
rheumatoid arthritis
)
Shoulder symptoms
Pain that's often worse while using your arm or shoulder
Possible causes
Tendonitis
,
bursitis
,
impingement
Shoulder symptoms
Tingling, numb, weak arm, feels like the shoulder is clicking or locking
Possible causes
Shoulder instability, sometimes because of
hypermobility
Shoulder symptoms
Sudden very bad pain, cannot move your arm (or it's difficult), sometimes changes shape
Possible causes
Dislocated shoulder
, broken bone (such as a
broken arm
or
broken collarbone
), torn or
ruptured tendon
Shoulder symptoms
Pain on top of the shoulder (where the collarbone and shoulder joint meet)
Possible causes
Problems in the acromioclavicular joint, like dislocation or stretched or torn ligaments

Video: shoulder pain
In this video, an expert explains how to prevent and ease shoulder pain and when to get help.
Media last reviewed: 1 November 2021
Media review due: 1 November 2024



