Skin cysts are round lumps, often filled with fluid or pus. They're usually harmless and often do not need treatment. But see a GP if you have an unexplained lump.

Check if it's a skin cyst
Skin cysts:
are round lumps just underneath the skin
often contain fluid or pus
sometimes have a small, dark spot in the middle
grow slowly and vary in size from smaller than a pea to several centimetres across
can get sore or red if they get infected – the redness may be harder to see on black or brown skin
Credit:
DR P. MARAZZI / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
: https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/1233383/view
Credit:
BSIP SA
/ Alamy Stock Photo : https://www.alamy.com/sebaceous-cyst-image230680821.html?imageid=31844F2B-D323-413F-8416-7BB6DE7C5336&p=165781&pn=2&searchId=38448f8711d6d5b46a27f99c9c30b795&searchtype=0
Skin cysts can form on most areas of the body, including the head, face, neck, chest and back. It's also possible to get them on the scrotum or inside the vagina.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you have a lump on your skin and you do not know what it is

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
you have a sore or red lump on your skin
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.

Treatments for a skin cyst
Skin cysts do not need to be treated if they're not causing any problems.
But treatment may be recommended if you have:
an infected skin cyst – you may be given
antibiotics
a large, painful cyst which interferes with everyday life – for example, a cyst on your head that catches when you brush your hair
Skin cyst removal
If you have a large, painful skin cyst which is making everyday tasks difficult, you may be able to have it removed on the NHS.
If it's not causing any problems but is on a visible part of your body, such as on your face, you may choose to have it removed. But you'll probably have to pay for this privately.
Local anaesthetic
is used to numb the area around the cyst before it's cut out. You'll have a small scar after the wound has healed.
You may also get new skin cysts in the future.
Important
Do not squeeze a skin cyst. If it bursts it could become infected, or if it's already infected you might spread the infection.

Types of skin cyst
There are lots of different types of skin cyst. Here are some of the main types.
Different types of cyst
Location
Type
Location
A cyst that develops in the top layer of skin (epidermis)
Type
Epidermoid cyst (sometimes known as a sebaceous cyst)
Location
A cyst that forms in a hair follicle, usually on the scalp
Type
Pilar cyst (also sometimes known as a sebaceous cyst)
Location
A cyst in a joint or tendon, most commonly on the wrists, hands and fingers
Type
Ganglion cyst
Location
A fluid-filled swelling on the back of the knee
Type
Baker's cyst
Location
A small, fluid-filled lump just inside the opening of the vagina
Type
Bartholin's cyst
Location
A small lump or swelling on the eyelid
Type
Meibomian cyst or chalazion

Causes of skin cysts
Anyone can get a skin cyst and it's not always known what causes them.
You may be more likely to get a skin cyst if:
a family member also has cysts (particularly pilar cysts)
you're an adult, particularly in middle age
you're a woman
you have
acne
you have a rare condition, such as Gardner syndrome
Skin cysts are not cancerous and you cannot get them from someone who has one.

