Slapped cheek syndrome (also called fifth disease) is common in children and should get better on its own within 3 weeks. It's rarer in adults, but can be more serious.

Check if it's slapped cheek syndrome
The first sign of slapped cheek syndrome is usually feeling unwell for a few days.
Symptoms may include:
a high temperature
a runny nose and sore throat
a headache
A red rash may appear on 1 or both cheeks. It may be less obvious on brown and black skin. Adults do not usually get the rash on their face.
Credit:
SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/550792/view
A few days later, a spotty rash may appear on the chest, arms and legs. The rash can be raised and itchy. It may be harder to see on brown and black skin.
Credit:
John Kaprielian/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/618192/view

How long it lasts
The cheek rash usually fades within 2 weeks.
The body rash also fades within 2 weeks, but sometimes lasts for up to a month, especially if you're exercising, hot, anxious or stressed.
Adults might also have joint pain and stiffness. This can happen in children too, but it's rare. Joint pain can continue for many weeks, even after the other symptoms have gone.
If you're not sure your child has slapped cheek syndrome
Look at other
rashes in babies and children
.

Things you can do yourself
You do not usually need to see a GP for slapped cheek syndrome.
There are some things you can do to ease the symptoms.
Do
rest
drink plenty of fluids to avoid
dehydration
– babies should continue their normal feeds
take
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
for a high temperature, headaches or joint pain
use moisturiser on itchy skin
speak to a pharmacist about
itchy skin
– they can recommend the best
antihistamine
for children
Don’t
do not give aspirin to children under 16

Important
Tell your midwife or a GP if you're pregnant or have a weakened immune system and have been near someone with slapped cheek syndrome.

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you think you have slapped cheek syndrome and:
you're pregnant – there's a very small risk of
miscarriage
or other complications
you have a blood disorder, such as
sickle cell disease
or
thalassaemia
– there's a risk of severe anaemia
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because of chemotherapy or diabetes
Ask for an urgent appointment if you have:
very pale skin
shortness of breath
extreme tiredness
fainted
These can be signs of severe anaemia and you might be sent to hospital for a
blood transfusion
.

How slapped cheek syndrome is spread
It's hard to avoid spreading slapped cheek syndrome because most people do not know they have it until they get the rash.
You can only spread it to other people before the rash appears.
Slapped cheek syndrome is caused by a virus (parvovirus B19). The virus spreads to other people, surfaces or objects by coughing or sneezing near them.
To reduce the risk of spreading the virus:
wash your hands often with water and soap
use tissues to trap germs when you cough or sneeze
bin used tissues as quickly as possible
Information:
You do not have to stay off work or school after the rash appears.
Let the school or teacher know if your child has slapped cheek syndrome.



