Snoring is very common and is not usually caused by anything serious. There are things that can help if it's a problem.

Things you can do to help you stop snoring
Simple lifestyle changes can help stop or reduce snoring.
Do
try to lose weight if you're overweight
sleep on your side – try taping or stitching a tennis ball to the back of your sleepwear, or buy a special pillow or bed wedge to help keep you on your side
consider asking your partner to use earplugs if your snoring affects their sleep
Don’t
do not smoke
do not drink too much alcohol
do not take sleeping pills – these can sometimes cause snoring

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
lifestyle changes are not helping your snoring
your snoring is having a big impact on your or your partner's life
you feel sleepy during the day, your breathing stops and starts while you sleep, or you make gasping or choking noises while you sleep – you may have
sleep apnoea
, which can be serious if not treated

What happens at your appointment
If you snore, the GP will look inside your mouth and nose to check for any problems that might be causing it.
It can help to bring someone with you to your appointment who can describe what your snoring is like, such as a partner.
The GP may do a blood test or refer you to a specialist for treatment or further tests if they're not sure what the cause is.

Treatment for snoring depends on the cause
Talk to a doctor about the best snoring treatment for you.
Causes and treatments for snoring
Possible cause
Treatments
Possible cause
Tongue partially blocking the back of your throat
Treatments
A device you wear in your mouth to bring your tongue forward (mandibular advancement device)
Possible cause
Mouth falling open when you're asleep
Treatments
A chin strap to hold your mouth closed, or a device you wear in your mouth to make you breathe through your nose while you sleep (vestibular shield)
Possible cause
Blocked or narrow airways in your nose
Treatments
Special devices (nasal dilators) or strips that hold your nose open while you sleep, or decongestants or nasal sprays to reduce swelling inside your nose
Surgery for snoring
Surgery is sometimes used to treat snoring if other treatments do not help.
But it's not widely available on the NHS, it does not always work and snoring can come back afterwards.

Causes of snoring
Snoring is caused by things such as your tongue, mouth, throat or airways in your nose vibrating as you breathe.
It happens because these parts of your body relax and narrow when you're asleep.
You're more likely to snore if you:
are overweight
smoke
drink too much alcohol
sleep on your back
Sometimes it's caused by a condition like
sleep apnoea
, which is when your airways become temporarily blocked as you sleep.

