Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI). If it's not treated, it can cause serious and potentially life-threatening problems.

Check if you have syphilis
The symptoms of syphilis are often mild and hard to notice. They tend to change over time and may come and go.
Symptoms of syphilis include:
small sores (ulcers) on your penis, vagina, or around your bottom (anus) – these are usually painless and you may only have one of them
sores in other areas, including in your mouth or on your lips, hands or bottom
white or grey warty growths most commonly on your penis, vagina or around your anus
a rash on the palms of your hands and soles of your feet that can sometimes spread all over your body – this is not usually itchy
white patches in your mouth
flu-like symptoms, such as a high temperature, headaches and tiredness
swollen glands
patchy hair loss on the head, beard and eyebrows
It can take 3 weeks or more for the symptoms of syphilis to appear after you're infected.
Sometimes the symptoms can improve or go away completely, but if you have not been treated the infection is still in your body.
This means you can still pass it on and you're at risk of getting serious problems later on.

Non-urgent advice:
Go to a sexual health clinic or see a GP if:
you or a sexual partner have symptoms of syphilis
a sexual partner has told you they have syphilis or another sexually transmitted infection (STI)
you've recently had sex with a new partner and did not use a condom
you're pregnant or planning to get pregnant and think you might have syphilis
you've injected drugs using a needle that's been used by someone who might have syphilis
Having a test is the only way to confirm if you have syphilis. If you do, treatment will need to be started as soon as possible. Tests for STIs are free on the NHS.
Find a sexual health clinic

Other ways to get a syphilis test
You can also have a syphilis test:
during a pregnancy (antenatal) appointment, if you're pregnant
using a self-test kit – you may be able to order a kit online from your
local STI testing and treatment service
or buy one from a pharmacy
You use a self-test kit at home and send it to a lab to be tested.

What happens during a syphilis test
If you have symptoms of syphilis, a doctor or nurse will check your penis, vagina and bottom (anus) for syphilis sores (ulcers). They may use a swab (like a cotton bud) to collect a fluid sample from any sores.
They'll also check the rest of your body for other signs of syphilis like a rash, sores or wart-like growths. They may also take a blood sample.
You may also have tests for other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) at the same time.
Information:
Contacting sexual partners
If you have syphilis, your current and any recent sexual partners will also need to be tested and treated.
The GP or sexual health clinic can advise you about contacting your sexual partners. This can be done without naming you.

Treatment for syphilis
Syphilis is treated with
antibiotics
, which you may have as injections, tablets or capsules.
Treatment may be started before your test result is known. How long you need treatment for will depend on the stage of your syphilis.
In some people, treatment can cause flu-like symptoms, such as a high temperature, headache and aching muscles. This usually lasts for up to 24 hours.
You'll need to go back to the GP surgery or sexual health clinic 6 and 12 weeks after starting treatment to be retested.
Important
Do not have sex (vaginal, anal or oral) until you and your partner have finished treatment and tests have shown treatment has worked.

Complications of syphilis
If it's not treated, syphilis can cause serious and potentially life-threatening problems including:
heart problems like
angina
,
aortic aneurysm
and
heart failure
brain problems like fits (seizures), memory problems, personality changes and dementia
nerve problems like shooting pains,
pins and needles
, joint pain and gradual damage the joints
problems with the skin, bones, testicles, liver and any other organ
Some of these problems may not appear for many years after being infected with syphilis.
Syphilis during pregnancy
If you're pregnant and have syphilis, you can pass it on to your baby before they're born. This is known as congenital syphilis.
Having syphilis during pregnancy can also increase your risk of
miscarriage
, premature birth and
stillbirth
.
You'll be offered
screening for syphilis
if you're pregnant so it can be found and treated before it causes any serious problems.

How you get syphilis
The most common way of getting syphilis is by having unprotected sex (vaginal, anal or oral sex without a condom) with someone who's infected.
You can get the infection if you come into contact with an ulcer on their penis, vagina, bottom (anus), or inside their mouth.
It's also possible for syphilis to be passed on:
to an unborn baby during pregnancy (congenital syphilis)
by injecting drugs with a needle that's been used by an infected person
during a blood or organ transplant (this is rare as all blood and organ donations in the UK are checked for syphilis)

Preventing syphilis
There are some things you can do to avoid getting syphilis and passing it on to others.
Do
use a condom when you have vaginal or anal sex
use a condom to cover the penis or a latex or plastic square (dam) to cover the vagina if you have oral sex
make sure you complete treatment if you or your partner have syphilis
Don’t
do not share sex toys (or wash and cover them with a new condom before anyone else uses them)
do not share needles if you inject drugs

