Tension headaches are very common and most people get them. You can treat them yourself with painkillers but see a GP if you have several headaches a week or they're severe.

Check if it's a tension headache
Common symptoms of tension headaches include:
pain on both sides of your head, face or neck
feeling like something is pressing on your head or being tightened around it
the affected area may feel tender and your head may hurt more when touched
You should be able to continue doing daily activities without making the headache worse.
Tension headaches last at least 30 minutes but they can last much longer, sometimes for several days.

Causes of tension headaches
Common causes of tension headaches include:
stress
sleep problems
caffeine
Taking painkillers for headaches too often or for a long time can also cause headaches. These are known as overuse or rebound headaches.
Tension headaches are not a sign of an underlying condition.

How to ease a tension headache
There are some things you can do to treat a tension headache yourself.
Do
use painkillers like
paracetamol
,
aspirin
and
ibuprofen
– paracetamol is the first choice of painkiller if you're pregnant, and children under 16 should not take aspirin
try doing activities to help you relax like exercise, yoga and massage
try changing your sleeping habits if sleep problems like
insomnia
may be causing your headaches
try using a low, firm pillow and heat or cold packs if you have
neck pain
and headaches
try to stay at home and avoid contact with other people if you have a high temperature or you do not feel well enough to do your normal activities
Don’t
do not have, or cut down on, drinks with caffeine in them like tea, coffee or cola
A pharmacist can help with headaches
You can ask a pharmacist about:
the best painkiller to take, if you're not sure which is suitable for you
what to do if you're pregnant – some medicines (like ibuprofen) are not recommended in pregnancy
medicines for sleep problems like insomnia if you're having trouble sleeping and you think it may be causing your headaches
Find a pharmacy

Information:
Find out more about headaches in pregnancy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
you get headaches several times a week or they're severe
painkillers and activities to help you relax do not help your headaches
you have a throbbing pain at the front or on 1 side of your head
you feel sick, vomit and find light or noise painful
These can be signs of a different type of headache, such as a
migraine
or
cluster headache
.
What we mean by severe pain
Severe pain:
always there and so bad it's hard to think or talk
you cannot sleep
it's very hard to move, get out of bed, go to the bathroom, wash or dress
Moderate pain:
always there
makes it hard to concentrate or sleep
you can manage to get up, wash or dress
Mild pain:
comes and goes
is annoying but does not stop you doing daily activities

What happens at your GP appointment
If you have regular tension headaches, a GP may suggest you keep a headache diary to record details of your headaches like:
how often you get them and how long they last
how painful they are and any other symptoms you have
possible causes
any medicines you take to help
The GP may advise you about taking painkillers for tension headaches, such as when to take medicine and how often you should take it.
You may be referred to a specialist if painkillers and activities like exercise do not help reduce your headaches or if it's not clear what's causing them.

Preventing tension headaches
If you get tension headaches regularly, you may be offered a course of
acupuncture
.
An antidepressant medicine called
amitriptyline
is also sometimes recommended to help prevent tension headaches.
You'll be prescribed a low-dose to start with, which may later be increased. The medicine usually needs to be taken for several months before it starts working.

