Tetanus is a serious, life-threatening condition caused by bacteria getting into a wound. It's rare in the UK because the tetanus vaccine has been part of the routine vaccination schedule for many years.

Check if you're at risk of tetanus
There is a risk of tetanus if soil or manure containing bacteria gets into a wound, such as a bite, burn or scratch.
Tetanus is rare, but the chances of getting it are higher if:
you have not been fully vaccinated (the tetanus vaccine has routinely been given since 1961)
you have a large or deep wound
the wound is very dirty or there is something stuck in the wound
Check with your GP surgery if you’re not sure you’ve been fully vaccinated against tetanus.

Symptoms of tetanus
The symptoms of tetanus usually start around 4 to 21 days after infection. Most people get symptoms after about 10 days.
The symptoms of tetanus include:
a stiff jaw (lockjaw), which can make opening your mouth difficult
painful muscle spasms, often in your back, tummy, arms, legs, hands and feet
difficulty breathing
swallowing problems
a high temperature
sweating
a fast heartbeat
fits (seizures)

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
You have a wound, such as a bite, burn or scratch and:
you've not been fully vaccinated against tetanus (or you’re not sure if you have)
you've tried to clean the wound but there's still dirt or soil in it
the wound is hot or swollen (it may also be painful, red or darker than the surrounding skin)
you have a high temperature, or you feel hot and shivery
You can call 111 or
get help from 111 online
.
Although tetanus is rare, it’s important to get a wound checked if it could become infected.

Immediate action required:
Call 999 or go to A&E if:
You have a wound, such as a bite, burn or scratch and:
it’s large or deep
you have a stiff jaw
you have painful muscle spasms or stiffness
you're finding it hard to breathe
you have a fast heartbeat
you have fits (seizures)
Tetanus is a medical emergency that needs to be treated immediately in hospital.
Find your nearest A&E

Treatments for tetanus
If you have tetanus, or a wound that has a high risk of being infected, you’ll be treated in hospital.
Treatments for tetanus include:
cleaning the wound – any dirt, soil or dead tissue will be removed
an injection with a medicine called tetanus immunoglobulin
other medicines, such as
antibiotics
and medicines to help control painful muscle spasms and stiffness
help with breathing using a machine that gives you oxygen
You may need a tetanus vaccine or booster if you've not been fully vaccinated (5 doses in total), or if your vaccination history is uncertain.
It can take several weeks or sometimes months to fully recover from tetanus.

How to avoid getting tetanus
The best way to avoid getting tetanus is to make sure you're fully vaccinated against it.
The tetanus vaccine is given as part of the routine
NHS vaccination schedule
.
The vaccines are given at:
8, 12 and 16 weeks – as part of the
6-in-1 vaccine
3 years and 4 months – as part of the
4-in-1 pre-school booster
14 years – as part of the
3-in-1 teenage booster
Check with your GP surgery if you’re not sure which vaccinations you or your child has had in the past.
Advice for travellers
Make sure you’re up to date with your routine vaccinations before travelling.
Tetanus vaccinations may be recommended before travelling if:
you're going to an area where it may be difficult to get medical help quickly and your last vaccine dose was more than 10 years ago
you've not been fully vaccinated

Find out more about travel vaccinations

