Whiplash is a neck injury caused by sudden movement of the head. It usually gets better within 2 to 3 months.

Check if you have whiplash
Whiplash most often happens after a traffic accident or a slip or fall.
Common symptoms of whiplash include:
neck pain
neck stiffness and difficulty moving your head
headaches
pain and muscle spasms in the shoulders and arms
It can take several hours for the symptoms to start after you injure your neck.

Things you can do to treat whiplash
There are some things you can do to treat whiplash.
Do
take painkillers, such as
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
, to help with pain
try to continue doing everyday activities – it might hurt a little but it will speed up your recovery
Don’t
do not use a neck brace or collar to support your neck – this does not help
do not rest your neck for long periods of time

Urgent advice:
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or get help from NHS 111 if:
You have injured your neck and:
you have severe pain despite taking paracetamol or ibuprofen
you have tingling or pins and needles on 1 or both sides of your body
you have problems with walking or sitting upright
you have a sudden "electric shock" feeling in your neck and back which may also go into your arms and legs
your arms or legs feel weak
These symptoms could be caused by damage to the nerves in your neck or back.
You can call 111 or
check your symptoms on 111 online
.
What we mean by severe pain
Severe pain:
always there and so bad it's hard to think or talk
you cannot sleep
it's very hard to move, get out of bed, go to the bathroom, wash or dress
Moderate pain:
always there
makes it hard to concentrate or sleep
you can manage to get up, wash or dress
Mild pain:
comes and goes
is annoying but does not stop you doing daily activities

Treatment for whiplash
A GP may prescribe a stronger painkiller such as
codeine
for whiplash.
If your symptoms do not get any better after a few weeks, a GP may refer you:
to a physiotherapist
to a pain specialist
for psychological support
Physiotherapy from the NHS may not be available in your area and waiting times can be long. You can also get physiotherapy privately.
Find a physiotherapist service

