Farting, also known as flatulence or wind, is normal. There are things you can do if you fart a lot or it's smelly. Sometimes it can be a sign of a health condition.

Check if your farting is normal
Farting is usually nothing to worry about. Everyone farts, some people more than others.
What's normal is different for everyone. If you notice a change or it's affecting your life, there are things you can do.

Things you can do to cut down excessive or smelly farts
Do
eat smaller meals, more often
drink or chew food slowly, with your mouth closed
exercise regularly to improve how your body digests food
drink peppermint tea
Don’t
do not chew gum, smoke, or suck pen tops or hard sweets (to avoid swallowing air)
do not wear loose-fitting dentures
do not eat too many foods that are difficult to digest and make you fart
do not drink too much beer, wine or fruit juice
Food and drinks that can make you fart
cabbage
broccoli
cauliflower
brussels sprouts
pulses, like beans or lentils
dried fruit, like raisins or apricots
onions
food or drinks containing the sweetener sorbitol
fizzy drinks and beer
A pharmacist can help with excessive or smelly farts
Speak to a pharmacist about excessive or smelly farts.
They might be able to tell you:
if you can buy something to help – for example, charcoal tablets or special underwear and pads that absorb smells
if you should see a GP
Find a pharmacy

Non-urgent advice:
See a GP if:
farting is affecting your life and self help and pharmacy treatments have not worked
you have a stomach ache or bloating that will not go away or comes back
you keep getting constipation or diarrhoea
you have lost weight without trying
you've had blood in your poo for 3 weeks

What causes excessive or smelly farts
Excessive or smelly farts can be caused when you swallow air or eat foods that are difficult to digest. It can also sometimes be a sign of a health condition.
Do not self-diagnose. See a GP if you're worried about your farting.
Possible causes of farting
Symptoms
Possible causes
Difficulty pooing and stomach pain
Constipation
Bloating, stomach pain with diarrhoea or constipation that comes and goes
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Indigestion, constipation, diarrhoea and stomach pain
Coeliac disease
Diarrhoea, bloating, stomach pain, feeling sick
Lactose intolerance
Excessive or smelly wind can also be a side effect of some medicines, including:
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), like
ibuprofen
some
laxatives
antifungal medicines
statins
Do not stop or change your medicine without speaking to a GP first.



